Vol.:(0123456789)
1 3
Affective Science (2023) 4:781–796
https://doi.org/10.1007/s42761-023-00191-4
METHODS PAPER
Py‑Feat: Python Facial Expression Analysis Toolbox
Jin Hyun Cheong1 · Eshin Jolly1 · Tiankang Xie1,2 · Sophie Byrne1 · Matthew Kenney1 · Luke J. Chang1,2
Received: 8 April 2021 / Accepted: 7 May 2023 / Published online: 8 August 2023
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
Studying facial expressions is a notoriously difficult endeavor. Recent advances in the field of affective computing have
yielded impressive progress in automatically detecting facial expressions from pictures and videos. However, much of this
work has yet to be widely disseminated in social science domains such as psychology. Current state-of-the-art models require
considerable domain expertise that is not traditionally incorporated into social science training programs. Furthermore, there
is a notable absence of user-friendly and open-source software that provides a comprehensive set of tools and functions that
support facial expression research. In this paper, we introduce Py-Feat, an open-source Python toolbox that provides support
for detecting, preprocessing, analyzing, and visualizing facial expression data. Py-Feat makes it easy for domain experts to
disseminate and benchmark computer vision models and also for end users to quickly process, analyze, and visualize face
expression data. We hope this platform will facilitate increased use of facial expression data in human behavior research.
Keywords  Facial expressions · Affective computing · Computer vision · Affect · Emotion
Facial expressions can reveal insights into an individual’s
internal mental state and provide nonverbal channels to aid
in interpersonal and cross-species communication (Darwin,
1886; Ekman, 1993) One of the main challenges to studying
facial expressions has been arriving at a consensus understanding as to how to best represent and objectively measure expressions. The Facial Affect Coding System (FACS;
Ekman & Friesen, 1978) is one of the most popular systems
to reliably (Sayette et al., 2001) quantify the intensity of
groups of facial muscles referred to as action units (AUs).
However, extracting facial expression information using
FACS coding can be a laborious and time-intensive process. Becoming a certified FACS coder requires 100 hours of
training, and manual labeling is slow (e.g., 1 minute of video
can take an hour (Cohn et al., 2007) and inherently contains
cultural biases and errors (Graesser et al., 2006; Kilbride &
Yarczower, 1983). Facial electromyography (EMG) provides
one method to objectively record from a finite number of
facial muscles at a high temporal resolution (Fridlund et al.,
1984; Larsen et al., 2003), but it requires specialized recording equipment that restricts data collection to the laboratory
and can visually obscure the face making it less ideal for
social contexts.
Automated methods using techniques from computer
vision have emerged as a promising approach to extract
representations of facial expressions from pictures, videos,
and depth cameras both inside and outside the laboratory.
Participants can be untethered from cumbersome wires and
can naturally engage in tasks such as watching a movie or
having a conversation (Cheong et al., 2019, 2020; Golland
et al., 2019; Navarathna et al., 2014; Sayette et al., 2012). In
addition to AUs, computer vision techniques have provided
alternative embedding spaces to represent facial expressions
such as facial landmarks (De la Torre, 2015) or lower dimensional latent representations (Vemulapalli & Agarwala,
2019). These tools have a number of applications relevant
to psychology such as predicting the intensity of emotions
Handling editor: Jonathan Gratch
Jin Hyun Cheong, Eshin Jolly, and Tiankang Xie equally
contributed to this work.
 *	 Eshin Jolly

eshin.jolly@dartmouth.edu
 *	 Luke J. Chang

luke.j.chang@dartmouth.edu
1
Computational Social and Affective Neuroscience
Laboratory, Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences,
Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH 03755, USA
2
Department of Quantitative Biomedical Sciences, Geisel
School of Medicine, Dartmouth College, Hanover,
NH 03755, USA

782

Affective Science (2023) 4:781–796
1 3
(Dupré et al., 2020; Haines et al., 2019; Höfling et al., 2020;
Stöckli et al., 2018) and other affective states such as pain
(Chen et al., 2019; Werner et al., 2017), distinguishing
between genuine and fake expressions (Littlewort et al.,
2009), detecting signs of depression (Wang et al., 2020),
inferring traits such as personality (Kachur et al., 2020;
Penton-Voak et al., 2006; Segalin et al., 2017) or political
orientations (Kosinski, 2021), and predicting the development of interpersonal relationships (Cheong et al., 2020;
Golland et al., 2019). Though facial expression research
has seen rapid growth in affective computing facilitated by
recent advances in machine learning, adoption in fields outside the domain of computer science such as psychology has
been surprisingly slow.
In our view, there are at least two specific barriers contributing to the slow adoption of automated methods in
social science fields such as psychology. First, there is a relatively high barrier to entry to training and accessing stateof-the-art models capable of quantifying facial expressions.
This requires knowledge of computer vision techniques, neural network architectures, and access to large labeled datasets and computational infrastructure that include Graphics Processing Units (GPUs). Though there are impressive
efforts to share high-quality datasets (Kanade et al., 2000;
Krumhuber et al., 2017; Lucey et al., 2010; Mavadati et al.,
2013, 2016; Zhang et al., 2014, 2016), there are still difficulties sharing this data involving participants’ privacy,
complicated end-user agreements, expensive handling fees,
contacting data curators, and finding affordable and stable
long-term hosting solutions. Though hundreds of models
have been developed to characterize facial expressions, no
standards have emerged for disseminating these models to
end users. These models are typically reported in conference
proceedings, occasionally shared on open code repositories
such as Github, and require considerable domain knowledge
as they have been developed using a multitude of computer
languages, rarely have documentation, and occasionally have
restrictive licensing. Each model may require the data to be
preprocessed in a specific way or rely on additional features
(e.g., landmarks, predefined regions of interest). Because
there are currently no generally agreed upon standards for
training and benchmarking beyond data competitions (e.g.,
WIDER, 300W, FERA, etc.), each model is typically trained
on different datasets, which makes it difficult to benchmark
the models using the same dataset to aid in the model selection process (Dhall et al., 2014; Stöckli et al., 2018). Platforms such as paperswithcode.com are helping to standardize the dissemination and benchmarking of models, but
sharing state-of-the-art models has not yet become a norm
in the field. Other domains such as natural language processing and reinforcement learning have begun to overcome this
issue with a variety of high-quality software platforms such
as Stanza (Qi et al., 2020), SpaCy, OpenAI Gym (Brockman
et al., 2016), and HuggingFace.
Second, there is a notable lack of free open-source
software to aid in detecting, preprocessing, analyzing,
and visualizing facial expressions (Table 1). Commercial
software options such as Affdex (Affectiva Inc) available
through iMotions (iMotions Biometric Research Platform
6.0. (iMotions A/S 2016) and Noldus FaceReader (Kuilenburg et al., 2008) can be expensive, have limited functionality, and typically do not employ state-of-the-art models
(Krumhuber et al., 2020, 2021; Yitzhak et al., 2017; see
(Stöckli et al., 2018; Dupré et al., 2020) for commercial
software performance comparisons). Furthermore, due to
strong interest from industry, there have been several free
Table 1   Software comparison on functionalities and affordability. X
indicates features provided by each package. Features from the Py-
Feat toolbox are shown in brackets. Facial landmarks are points pertaining to locations of key spatial positions of the face including the
jaw, mouth, nose, eyes, and eyebrows. Action units are facial muscle
groups defined by FACS (Ekman & Rosenberg, 1997). Emotions
refer to the detection of canonical emotional expressions. Headpose
refers to the pitch, roll, and yaw orientations of the face. Gaze refers
to the direction the eyes are looking. *iMotions is a platform, and its
feature extraction relies on the purchase of either the AFFDEX or
FACET modules. **Detection of action units and analysis functionalities require a separate add-on purchase of The Action Unit Module
and the Project Analysis Module for the Noldus FaceReader. ***We
note that OpenFace can perform some preprocessing such as median
face image subtraction and post-processing of AUs to correct for atrest expressions
Facial feature detection
Preprocessing
Analysis
Free
Facial landmarks
Action units
Emotions
Headpose
Gaze
iMotions*
X
X
FACET
X
X
X
X
AFFDEX
X
X
X
X
Noldus FaceReader
X**
X
X
X**
OpenFace
X
X
X
X
***
X
face-api.js
X
X
X
Py-Feat
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

783
Affective Science (2023) 4:781–796
1 3
software packages such as the Computer Expression Recognition Toolbox (Littlewort et al., 2011), Intraface (Torre,
2015), and Affectiva API (McDuff et al., 2016; Affectiva
Inc) that have turned into commercial products or been
acquired by larger technology companies such as Apple Inc
or Meta and rendered unavailable to researchers. Currently,
OpenFace (Baltrusaitis et al., 2018) is the most widely used
open-source software that allows users to extract facial
landmarks and action units from face images and videos.
However, OpenFace does not provide a comprehensive
suite of tools for preprocessing, analyzing, and visualizing data, which would make these tools more accessible to
non-domain experts. As an example, in other fields such as
neuroscience, the rapid growth of neuroimaging research
has been facilitated by the widespread use of free tools such
as FSL (Jenkinson et al., 2012), AFNI (Cox, 1996), SPM
(Friston et al., 1991), and NiLearn (Abraham et al., 2014)
that enable end users to preprocess, analyze, and visualize
complex brain imaging data. We believe the broader emotion
research community would greatly benefit from additional
software platforms dedicated to facial expression analysis
with functions for extracting, preprocessing, analyzing, and
visualizing facial expression data.
To meet this need, we have created the Python Facial
Expression Analysis Toolbox (Py-Feat) which is a free,
open-source package dedicated to support the analysis of
facial expression data. It provides tools to extract facial
features like OpenFace (Baltrusaitis et al., 2018) but additionally provides modules for preprocessing, analyzing,
and visualizing facial expression data (Fig. 1). Py-Feat is
designed to meet the needs of two distinct types of users.
Py-Feat benefits computer vision researchers who can use
our platform to disseminate their state-of-the-art models to
a broader audience and easily compare their models with
others on the same benchmark metrics. It also benefits social
science researchers looking for free and easy-to-use tools
that can both detect and analyze facial expressions. In this
paper, we outline the key components of the Py-Feat toolbox
including the facial feature detection module and analysis
tools, provide quantitative assessments of the performance
of the detection models on benchmark data including the
robustness of the models to real-world data, and provide a
tutorial of how the toolbox can be used to analyze an open
face expression dataset.
Py‑Feat Design and Module Overview
Py-Feat is written in the Python programming language. We
selected Python over other popular languages (e.g., Matlab,
C, etc.) for several reasons. First, Python is open source and
completely free to use and compiles to all major operating systems (e.g., Mac, Windows, Unix). This makes the
software accessible to the largest number of users. Second,
Python is among the easiest programming languages to read
and learn and is increasingly being taught in introduction to
programming classes. Though we do not currently provide
a graphical user interface (GUI) to Py-Feat, we believe
Fig. 1   Facial expressions analysis pipeline. Analysis of facial expressions begins with recording face photos or videos using a recording
device such as webcams, camcorders, head-mounted cameras, or
360 cameras. After capturing the face, researchers can use Py-Feat to
detect facial features such as the location of the face within a rectangular bounding box, the location of key facial landmarks, action units,
and emotions, and check the detection results with image overlays
and bar graphs. The detection results can be preprocessed by extracting additional features such as Histogram of Oriented Gradients
(HOG) or multi-wavelet decomposition. Resulting data can then be
analyzed within the toolbox using statistical methods such as t-tests,
regressions, and intersubject correlations. Visualization functions can
generate face images from models of action unit activations to show
vector fields depicting landmark movements and heatmaps of facial
muscle activations

784

Affective Science (2023) 4:781–796
1 3
it is highly easy to use with minimal background in programming (see our example code below). Third, Python
has emerged as one of the primary languages used across
academia and industry for data science. There is a vibrant
developer community that has already created a rich library
of tightly integrated high-quality scientific computing packages for working with arrays such as numpy (Harris et al.,
2020) and pandas (McKinney, 2011); scientific numerical
routines with scipy (Jones et al., 2001), machine learning algorithms with scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011),
tensorflow (Abadi et al., 2016), and pytorch (Paszke et al.,
2019); and plotting with matplotlib (Hunter, 2007), seaborn
(Waskom, 2021), and plotly. This makes it easy for Py-Feat
to incorporate new functionality as it becomes available in
other toolboxes, but also for Py-Feat users to incorporate any
Python package into other processing pipelines. Many of the
core libraries are supported by big tech companies and are
rapidly providing functionality to enable users to take advantage of newer innovations in hardware such as GPUs and
distributed computing systems. In addition, Python libraries
tend to have comprehensive documentation and testing, and
there are many excellent tutorials for learning how to use
python online, which makes the language very accessible to
beginners. For example, we have developed basic tutorials
for learning to analyze data with Python on our DartBrains.
org course (Chang et al., 2020) and more advanced tutorials
on analyzing naturalistic neuroimaging data (Chang et al.,
2020). We have built a jupyter-book (Community & jupyter
book., 2020) to accompany our toolbox with tutorials on
how to perform analyses that can be easily augmented by
the user community (https://​py-​feat.​org/).
Py-Feat currently has two main modules for working
with facial expression data. First, the Detector module
makes it easy for users to detect facial expression features
from image or video stimuli. We offer multiple models for
extracting the primary face expression features that most
end users will want to work with. This includes detecting
faces in the stimuli and identifying the coordinates of the
spatial location of a bounding box for each face. We also
detect 68  facial landmarks, which are coordinates identifying the spatial location of the eyes, nose, mouth, and jaw.
The bounding box and landmarks can be used in models to
detect the head pose such as the face orientation in terms of
rotation around axes in three-dimensional space. Py-Feat
also detects higher-level facial expression features such as
AUs and basic emotion categories. We offer multiple models for each detector to keep the toolbox flexible for many
use cases, but we also have picked sensible defaults for
users who may be overwhelmed by the number of options.
The features cover the majority of the ways in which facial
expressions can be currently described by computer vision
algorithms. Importantly, new features and models can be
added to the toolbox as they become available in the field.
The majority of the models in the toolbox are implemented
in PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019), which means they can also
utilize Nvidia GPUs if they are available, which can dramatically speed up performance.
In addition, Py-feat also includes the Fex data module to
work with the features extracted from the Detector module.
This module includes methods for preprocessing, analyzing,
and visualizing facial expression data. We offer an easyto-use application programming interface (API) for slicing,
grouping, sampling, and summarizing data as well as selecting different types of data (i.e., faceboxes, landmarks, action
units, emotions, face poses), preprocessing facial expression
time series data, extracting additional features from time
series data, analyzing aggregates of facial expressions data,
and visualizing intermediary preprocessing steps.
Py‑Feat Performance
Computer vision models are highly complex and often
employ completely different preprocessing steps and model
architectures. All of the technical details about the architecture of each of the models and how they were trained
can be found in the Supplementary Materials. To provide
users with an estimate of how well these models are likely
to perform on their own datasets, we report benchmark performance on datasets that were never used in training the
models. Importantly, we primarily used benchmark datasets
that are the standard for each domain in data competitions
and include highly variable naturalistic images collected in
the wild when possible. Table 2 includes details about each
of the benchmark datasets. Full details can be found in the
supplementary materials.
Face Detection
One of the most basic steps in the facial feature detection
process is to identify if there is a face in the image and
where that face is located. Py-Feat includes three popular
face detectors including Faceboxes (Zhang et al., 2017),
Multi-task Convolutional Neural Network (MTCNN; Zhang
et al., 2019, 2020), and RetinaFace (Deng et al., 2019).
These detectors are widely used in other open-source software (Baltrusaitis et al., 2018) and are known to achieve
fast and accurate face detection results even for partially
occluded or non-frontal faces. Face detection results are
reported as a rectangular bounding box of the face and
include a confidence score for each detected face. We
benchmarked the face detection models on the validation
set of the WIDER FACE dataset, which is a standard dataset
containing images in the wild retrieved from the internet
(Yang et al., 2016), using average precision described in the
WIDER Face technical paper (Yang et al., 2016). Overall,

785
Affective Science (2023) 4:781–796
1 3
we found that the Py-Feat implementations of each of the
models achieved acceptable levels of performance, although
lower than what was reported in the original papers (Deng
et al., 2019; Table 3). This may be a consequence of using
different hyperparameters. We also observed decreased
performance as the classification task becomes increasingly
more difficult, which includes small, inverted, and highly
occluded faces.
Landmark Detection
After a face is identified in an image, it is common to identify the facial landmarks, which are coordinate points in
the image space outlining the jaw, mouth, nose, eyes, and
eyebrows of a face. The distance and angular relationships
between the landmarks can be used to represent face expressions and used to infer affective states such as pain (Werner et al., 2017). Py-Feat uses a standard  coordinate facial
landmark scheme that is widely used across datasets and
software (Baltrusaitis et al., 2018; Sagonas et al., 2016; Shen
et al., 2015) and currently includes three facial landmark
detectors including the Practical Facial Landmark Detector (PFLD; Guo et al., 2019), MobileNets (Howard et al.,
2017), and MobileFaceNets (Chen et al., 2018) algorithms.
We benchmarked these models on the 300 Faces in the Wild
(300 W) dataset (Sagonas et al., 2013, 2016), which is a
standard used in data competitions and contains in-the-wild
face images that vary across luminance, scale, pose, expressions, and occlusion levels. We compute the average root
mean squared error between the predicted and ground truth
coordinates across the landmark points normalized by the
interocular distance. Overall, we found that the Feat-Mobile-
FaceNet performed the best on our benchmark (Table 4).
Head Pose Detection
Another feature of a face expression beyond its location in an
image or the location of specific parts of the face is the position of the head in three-dimensional space. Rotations from
a head-on view can be described in terms of rotation around
the x, y, and z planes and are referred to as pitch, roll, and
yaw, respectively. Py-Feat includes support for the Img2Pose
model. This model does not rely on prior face detections,
so it can also be used as a face-bounding box detector. The
Table 2   Benchmarking datasets. Details about each dataset used for benchmarking the Py-Feat detectors
Dataset name Benchmark type
Participants Images
Type of data
Posed
Annotations
WIDER
Face Bounding Box 393,703
32,203
Images retrieved from search
engines
In the wild
Manually annotated face
location
300W
Landmarks
 > 600
600
Images retrieved from search
engines
In the wild
Semi-automatic and manual
corrections
BIWI Kinect
Head pose
20
15,000
Video recorded while subjects rotate their head
Posed
Semi-automatic
DIFSA +
Action units
9
57,000
3-min video, imitate 30
facial action units
Spontaneous, Posed Manually annotated AUs (1, 2,
4, 5, 6, 9, 12, 17, 20, 25, 26)
by trained FACS coder
Namba
Action units
12
288
Images taken at different
angles
Posed
Manually annotated AUs by
trained FACS coder
AffectNet
Emotions
440,000
440,000 Images retrieved from search
engines
In the wild
Manually annotated emotion
categories (neutral, surprise,
happy, fear, sad, disgust,
contempt, anger)
Table 3   Benchmarking results for face bounding box detection. Easy,
medium, and hard results retrieved from WIDER Face. Numbers
are average precision scores with higher numbers indicating better
detection accuracy. Bold numbers indicate the best performance for
each column, and bracketed numbers indicate the performance of the
model selected as the default for Py-Feat
Model
Easy
Medium
Hard
Feat-img2Pose constrained
.589
.576
.351
Feat-img2Pose unconstrained
.740
.744
.555
Feat-Faceboxes
.537
.348
.147
Feat-MTCNN
.725
.718
.473
Feat-RetinaFace (default)
[.760]
[.669]
[.347]
Table 4   Benchmarking results for face landmark detection. Feat
models were initialized with face-bounding boxes using RetinaFace.
Numbers are root mean squared errors of coordinates with lower
numbers indicating better alignment. Bolded numbers indicate the
best performance, and bracketed numbers indicate the performance of
the model selected as the default for Py-Feat
Model
300W-Test RMSE
Feat-MobileNet
5.78
Feat-MobileFaceNet (default)
[4.99]
Feat-PFLD
5.39

786

Affective Science (2023) 4:781–796
1 3
constrained version of Img2Pose is fine-tuned on the 300W-
LP dataset, which only includes head poses in range (− 90°
to + 90°). We benchmarked our head pose models using the
BIWI Kinect dataset, which contains videos of participants
rotating their heads according to specific pose instructions
(Fanelli et al., 2013; Table 5). We computed the mean absolute error in degrees for pitch, roll, and yaw. Overall, we
found that the constrained version of Img2Pose achieved a
slightly better performance compared to the unconstrained
version on our benchmark.
Action Unit Detection
In addition to the basic properties of a face in an image,
Py-Feat also includes models for detecting deviations of
specific facial muscles (i.e., action units; AUs) from a neutral face expression using the FACS coding system. Py-feat
currently contains two models for detecting action units.
The architecture of the models is based on the highly robust
and well-performing model used in OpenFace (Baltrusaitis
et al., 2018), which extracts Histogram of Oriented Gradient (HOG) features from within the landmark coordinates
using a convex hull algorithm, compresses the HOG representation using principal components analysis (PCA), and
finally uses these features to individually predict each of the
12 AUs using popular shallow learning methods based on
kernels (i.e., linear Support Vector Machine; SVM (Chang &
Lin, 2011), and ensemble learning (i.e., optimized gradient
boosting; XGB (Chen et al., 2016; see supplemental materials for training details). We compare the performance of our
models to OpenFace and also FACET, which was previously
available in iMotions before the company was acquired by
Apple Inc. We benchmarked the AU detection models using
the Extended DISFA Plus dataset (Mavadati et al., 2016),
which contains short videos of participants making posed
facial expressions based on imitating a target image and
also spontaneous facial expressions elicited from viewing
experimental stimuli. We used F1 scores, an accuracy metric for binary classification, to quantify the performance of
twelve different AUs. We found that the previously available
FACET-iMotions achieved the best overall accuracy and was
the best detector for AUs 2, 4, 5, 9, 15, and 17. OpenFace
achieved the second highest average F1 scores followed by
the our Feat-XGB & Feat-SVM models. OpenFace was the
most accurate in detecting AUs 1, 6, and 12. The Feat-XGB
model performed the best on AU 20, while the Feat-SVM
model only performed the best on AU26. We have selected
the Feat-XGB model to be the default model as it provides
AU detection probability estimates rather than binary classifications (Table 6).
Emotion Detection
Finally, Py-Feat also includes models for detecting the presence of specific emotion categories based on third-party
judgments. Emotion detectors are trained on manually
posed or naturalistically elicited emotional facial expressions which allows detectors to classify new images based
on how much a face resembles a canonical emotional facial
expression. It is important to note that there is currently no
consensus in the field if categorical representations of emotion are the most reliable and valid nosology of emotional
facial expressions (Cowen et al., 2021; Jack et al., 2012).
For example, detecting a smiling face as happy does not
necessarily imply that the individual is experiencing an
internal subjective state of happiness (Barrett et al., 2019),
as these types of latent state inferences require additional
contextual information beyond a static image (Saxe & Houlihan, 2017) . However, labeling specific configurations of
AUs with the semantic concepts of emotions can still be
useful in emotion research to characterize the contexts in
which people tend to display these facial expressions or
how the display of certain emotion expressions accompanies changes in learning (Haines et al., 2019) and social
behaviors (Cheong et al., 2020). Py-Feat includes two emotion detectors capable of detecting seven categories of emotions: anger, disgust, fear, happiness, sadness, surprise, and
neutral. The Residual Masking Network (ResMaskNet; Luan
et al., 2020) is an end-to-end convolutional neural network
model that combines deep residual networks with masking
blocks. The masking blocks help focus the model’s attention
on local regions of interest to refine its feature map for more
fine-grained predictions, and the residual structure helps to
maintain performances in deeper layers. We also provide a
statistical learning model that uses Linear SVM (Chang &
Lin, 2011) using a similar procedure as our AU models. We
benchmarked our models using F1 scores on a random subset of 500 images from the AffectNet dataset (Mollahosseini
Table 5   Model performance on BIWI Kinect Head Pose Dataset.
Model performance on the BIWI Kinect dataset, where mean absolute error (MAE) values are reported in degrees (lower is better). The
table shows the performance of the img2pose models. Bolded numbers indicate the best performance, and bracketed numbers indicate
the performance of the model selected as the default for Py-Feat
Model
Pitch MAE
Roll MAE
Yaw MAE
Average MAE
Img2pose constrained
[3.96]
[4.74]
[3.65]
[4.12]
Img2pose unconstrained
5.97
4.45
3.36
4.59

787
Affective Science (2023) 4:781–796
1 3
et al., 2019), which contains unposed expressions of emotions as they naturally occur in the wild outside of a carefully
curated laboratory environment (Table 7). We found that
the Residual Masking Network model (Luan et al., 2020)
achieved the highest F1 score, followed by our Feat-SVM
model, and the FACET-iMotions model.
Robustness Experiments
While computer vision researchers typically focus on developing new face expression models that can outperform previous work on standard benchmarking datasets, end users
are often more interested in how well the models perform
on real-world data collection contexts. This type of data is
typically messier than the carefully curated open datasets.
We intentionally selected benchmark datasets that contain
spontaneous or naturalistic images collected outside the
laboratory in the wild. In addition to these benchmarks, we
also evaluated the robustness of the models included in Py-
Feat to different types of real-world scenarios that are known
to create problems for computer vision models including
variations in luminance, occlusions of specific regions of
the face, and also head rotation.
Luminance
To test the robustness of our model to different lighting conditions, we modified our benchmark datasets to include two
different levels of luminance (low, where brightness factor
uniformly sampled from [.1, .8] for each image, and high,
where brightness factor uniformly sampled from [1.2, 1.9]
for each image). This can be useful for knowing how the
models might be impacted by inconsistent lighting or smaller
variations in skin pigmentation. Overall, we found that the
majority of the deep learning detectors were fairly robust
to variations in luminance. However, the shallow learning
detectors that rely on HOG features were more dramatically
impacted by high and low levels of variance (Fig. 2).
Occlusion
In addition, we evaluated the performance of all of the detectors in three different occlusion contexts. Occlusions of the
face are very common in real-world data collection scenarios
where a participant may cover their face with a hand or be
partially hidden behind some other physical object. We separately masked out the eyes, nose, and mouth on the benchmark
datasets described above by applying a black mask to regions
of the face using the facial landmark information (Fig. 2A).
The pose and landmark models were fairly robust to facial
occlusions. However, face detection substantially dropped
with occlusions, particularly when the nose was masked.
Occlusion of specific facial structures can also provide an
Table 6   Benchmarking results for AU models on DisfaPlus. Numbers shown are F1 scores. Bolded numbers indicate the best performance, and bracketed numbers indicate the performance of
the model selected as the default for Py-Feat
Model
AU1
AU2
AU4
AU5
AU6
AU9
AU12
AU15
AU17
AU20
AU25
AU26
Average
Models not in Py-Feat
FACET iMotions
.58
.62
.74
.56
.78
.73
.77
.59
.47
.15
.64
.43
.59
OpenFace
.71
.52
.69
.49
.81
.54
.83
.34
.43
.13
.72
.67
.57
Models in Py-Feat
Feat-XGB
[.55]
[.55]
[.63]
[.53]
[.64]
[.35]
[.72]
[.27]
[.25]
[.24]
[.80]
[.66]
[.52]
Feat-SVM
.48
.44
.63
.46
.58
.60
.77
.220
.30
.17
.83
.69
.52

788

Affective Science (2023) 4:781–796
1 3
interesting lesion test for higher-level facial feature extraction such as action units and emotions. Consistent with our
expectations, the AU detector performance dropped for AUs
1, 2, 4, 5, 6, and 9 when the eyes were masked, while performance dropped for AUs 4, 12, 15, 20, 25, and 26 when
the mouth was masked. AUs 4, 9, 17, 20, and 26 detection
Table 7   Benchmarking results for motion models on AffectNet. Numbers shown are F1 scores. Bolded numbers indicate the best performance,
and bracketed numbers indicate the performance of the model selected as the default for Py-Feat
Model
Anger
Disgust
Fear
Happy
Sad
Surprise
Neutral
Average
Models not available on Py-Feat
FACET iMotions
.33
.42
.35
.67
.24
.36
.43
.40
Models available on Py-Feat
Residual Masking Network
(default)
[.53]
[.53]
[.48]
[.77]
[.54]
[.55]
[.49]
[.55]
Feat-SVM
.37
.43
.38
.60
.33
.42
.32
.41
Fig. 2   Py-Feat detector robustness experiments. A Example
image for robustness manipulations. B RetinaFace face detection robustness results. Values
are average precision where
larger indicates better performance. C Landmark detection
robustness results. Values are
normalized mean average error
(MAE) where smaller values
indicate better performance.
D img2pose-constrained pose
detection robustness results.
Values are mean average error
(MAE) where smaller values
indicate better performance.
E Feat-XGB AU detection
robustness results. Values are
F1 scores where larger values
indicate better performance. We
note that the DISFA + dataset
does not include labels for AU7.
F Residual Masking Network
emotion detection robustness
results. Values are F1 scores
where larger values indicate
better performance. G Feat-
XGB AU robustness to rotation
results. Values are F1 scores
where larger values indicate
better performance

789
Affective Science (2023) 4:781–796
1 3
performance dropped when the nose was blocked. The emotion models were even more dramatically affected by occlusion of specific facial structures. Anger, fear, sadness, and
surprise detection was substantially impacted by occlusion of
the eyes, while disgust, happy, and neutral detection dropped
when the mouth was blocked, and anger, disgust, fear, and
sadness were degraded with occlusions to the nose.
Robustness Against Head Rotation
Most action unit models are trained using images in which
the participants directly face the camera. However, in realworld situations, faces are likely to be rotated relative to
the camera position. Prior work has evaluated the performance of different AU detection algorithms on a new dataset, in which participants (N = 12) were instructed to imitate
specific facial expressions, while a camera recorded their
expressions at specific rotation angles of 0°, 15°, 30° and
45° (Namba et al., 2021). Action units for each image were
manually annotated by a trained FACS coder. We tested our
Py-Feat XGB AU detection model using this dataset and
found that AU detection performance tends to decrease as
rotation angles increase. However, the XGB model is fairly
robust to rotation for most of the AUs except for AUs 9, 12,
17, and 26, where performance drops substantially for the
largest 45° rotation (Fig. 2G).
Visualization
We provide several plotting tools to help visualize the Fex
detection results in each stage of the analysis pipeline. In
the facial feature detection stage, we offer the plot_detections function that overlays the face, facial landmarks,
action units, and emotion detection results in a single figure
(Fig. 1). This function can be used to validate the detection
results at each video frame or image. The Fex class also
allows users to plot time series graphs as well, which can be
useful for examining how detected action unit activities vary
over time or if there are segments of missing data.
In addition, we provide a model which can be used to
visualize how combinations of activated AUs will look like
on a stylized anonymous face (Fig. 3). This model visualizes
the intensity of AUs overlaid onto a face in the approximate
locations of where the facial muscles are located and also
how AUs deform the face. Using this model, users can visualize the action units and their accompanying 2D landmark
deformation on a standard face from any combination of
action unit activations identified from their analyses (see
supplemental materials for training details; Chang et al.,
2021; Chen et al., 2019). We hope to incorporate other types
of visualization models as they become available.
Example Py‑Feat Analysis Walkthrough
Py-eat easily facilitates numerous complex analyses. As a
demonstration, we used a subset of the open video dataset
from Watson et al. (2020) in which participants were filmed
while speaking in two conditions: delivering good news
statements (e.g., “your application has been accepted”) or
bad news statements (e.g., “your application was denied”).
A more comprehensive walkthrough using these data is
included in the Py-Feat full analysis tutorial.
Extracting facial features can be extracted in Py-Feat with
relative ease using an intuitive API, and only requires two
lines of code: one to initialize a detector and another to process a video:

detector = Detector() # initialize default detectors fex = detector.detect_video(‘video.mp4’)
# process each video frame
The fex object is a dataframe organized as frames by features and contains all detections for every frame of the video
including faceboxes, landmarks, poses, action units, and emotions. Each fex object makes use of a special.sessions property that facilitates easy data aggregation and comparison.
For example, we can compare the means of each condition
of the data by setting sessions to the condition labels with.
update_sessions(), followed by.extract_summary() to compute summary statistics aggregated by condition (Fig. 4A):
# dictionary mapping video name to the
condition it belonged to.
by_condition = fex.update_sessions(
{‘001’: ‘good_news’, ‘002’: ‘bad_
news’, …}).
# plot condition mean per action unit.
by_condition.extract_mean().aus.
plot(kind = "bar")
Py-Feat also makes it easy to perform time series analyses
using the isc() method. For example, we can estimate the
similarity between videos in terms of how their detected
happiness varies over time (Fig. 4B):
# calculate the pairwise similarity between videos in terms of their
detected happiness.
i n t e r v i d e o _ s i m i l a r i t y  =  f e x .
isc(col = "happiness", method = 'pearson')
# visualize the video x video correlation matrix.

790

Affective Science (2023) 4:781–796
1 3
from seaborn import heatmap
heatmap(intervideo_similarity)
Py-Feat makes it simple to perform formal comparisons
using the   regress() method. This method performs a
“mass-univariate” style analysis (Worsley & Friston, 1995)
across all specified features. For example, we can use the
experiment condition labels (“good” or “bad” news) as
contrast codes and AUs as outcomes to perform a t-test on
every AU. This returns the associated regression beta-values,
standard-errors, t-statistics, p-values, degrees-of-freedom,
and residuals for each AU:
# setup mean difference contrast of
good news > bad news.
by_condition_codes = fex.update_
sessions({"goodNews": 1, "badNews": -1})
# compare condition differences at
every AU.
b, se, t, p, df, residuals = by_condition_codes.regress(
X = " s e s s i o n s " ,
y = " a u s " ,
f i t _
intercept=True)
Py-Feat can just as easily facilitate a decoding analysis
like the classification analysis performed by Watson and
colleagues (Watson et al., 2020) using the predict()
method (Fig. 4C). For example, we can use all AUs as
features and try to classify the condition in which participants were delivering news. This returns the decoder
model object along with its cross-validated performance:
# same algorithm used by Watson et al.
from sklearn.discriminant_analysis
import LinearDiscriminantAnalysis
# predict conditions from AUs with
fivefold cross-validation.
Fig. 3   Demonstration of action unit to landmark visualization. A
Facial expressions generated from AU detections on real images.
Detected AU activations were extracted from each of the six labeled
images displaying one emotion and projected through Py-Feat’s visualization model. B Facial expressions generated by manually activating each AU in sequence

791
Affective Science (2023) 4:781–796
1 3
model, cross_validated_accuracy = by_
condition_codes.predict(
 X = ”aus”, y = "sessions", model = LinearDiscriminantAnalysis).
Unique to Py-feat is the ability to use its visualization
model to reconstruct any facial expression from AU values
(Fig. 4D). A compelling use case is reconstructing the
facial expression implied by the weights estimated for each
AU by the decoder. Py-Feat offer two functions to do this:
plot_face() which reconstructs a single image and
animate_face() which can morph one facial expression to another to emphasize what is changing:
from feat.plotting import plot_face, animate_face
# static image of reconstructed face.
plot_face(au = model.coef_.squeeze()) #
the LDA classifier weights
# animated gif morphing a neutral face
to the reconstructed face.
Fig. 4   Illustrative Py-eat analyses. A Average probability of action
unit (AU) activation differences when delivering good news and bad
news for AUs 6, 12, and 25. The dashed line reflects maximal detector uncertainty. B Clustered intervideo time-series correlations of
happiness detected over video-frames. Warmer colors indicate a pair
of videos was more similar in terms of their happiness time-courses.
C Example replication analysis of Watson et al. (Watson et al., 2020).
Each bar depicts the cross-validated accuracy decoding good vs bad
news clips using emotion, AU, pose, or combined features. Error-bars
reflect the standard deviation across cross-validation folds. Py-eat’s
default emotion detector performs perfectly on the subset of data in
this example. The dashed line reflects chance performance. D Facial
expression reconstructed from the AU classifier weights using the AU
decoder (orange bar)

792

Affective Science (2023) 4:781–796
1 3
animate_face(
 start = "neutral", # start with a neutral facial expression
 end = model.coef_.squeeze()) # end with
LDA classifier weights
These simple examples are only a fraction of the analyses that are possible using Py-Feat, but provide an example
of how the toolbox makes it possible to conduct complex
analyses with minimal python code.
Discussion
In this paper, we describe the motivation, design principles,
and core functionality of the open-source Python package
Py-Feat. This package aims to bridge the gap between model
developers creating new algorithms for detecting faces,
facial landmarks, action units, and emotions with end users
hoping to use these cutting-edge models in their research.
To achieve this, we designed an easy-to-use and opensource Python toolbox that allows researchers to quickly
detect facial expressions from face images and videos and
subsequently preprocess, analyze, and visualize the results.
We hope this project will make facial expression analysis
more accessible to researchers who may not have sufficient
domain knowledge to implement these techniques themselves. In addition, Py-Feat provides a platform for model
developers to disseminate their models to end-user researchers and compare the performance of their model with others
included in the toolbox.
Automated detection of facial expressions has the potential to complement other techniques such as psychophysiology, brain imaging, and self-report (Chang et al., 2018; Chen
et al., 2019; Cheong et al., 2020) along with 3-D simulations (Jack et al., 2014) in improving our understanding of
how emotions interact with perception, cognition, and social
interactions and are impacted by our physical and mental
health. Studying facial expressions is becoming increasingly
more accessible to non-specialists. For example, recording
participants has become more convenient with a number
of affordable recording options such as webcams that can
be used to record remote participants, open-source headmounted cameras allowing reliable face recordings in social
settings (Cheong et al., 2019), as well as 360 cameras that
can be used to record multiple individuals simultaneously.
The primary goal of Py-Feat is to make the preprocessing,
analysis, and visualization of these results similarly accessible and free of charge to non-specialists. Open source software focused on the full analysis pipeline has been instrumental in contributing to the rapid progress of research in
other domains such as neuroimaging with FSL (Jenkinson
et al., 2012), AFNI (Cox, 1996), SPM (Friston et al., 1991),
and NiLearn (Abraham et al., 2014) and natural language
processing with Stanza (Qi et al., 2020), SpaCy, and HuggingFace. We believe the broader emotion research community would greatly benefit from additional software platforms dedicated to facial expression analysis with functions
for extracting, preprocessing, analyzing, and visualizing
facial expression data.
Our toolbox is designed to be flexible and dynamic and
includes models that are performing near the state of the
art. However, there are several limitations that are important to note. First, our current implementations of some of
the models are not performing as well as the original versions. This could be attributed to nuances in hyperparameter
optimization, variations in random seeds, and variations in
the benchmarking datasets. We anticipate that these models
will improve over time as more datasets become available
and also plan to continually incorporate new models as they
become available. Benchmarking of new models will be
added to a living document on our project website to allow
users to make informed choices in selecting models. Second,
we have not yet attempted to optimize our toolbox for speed.
For example, we did not benchmark our models on processing time because we believe most users will be applying
these detectors on batches of pre-recorded videos rather than
in real-time applications. Currently, our models are able to
process a single image in about 400 ms with a GPU and
about 1.5 s on a CPU. For users who need faster processing
times on videos, processing can be sped up by temporally
downsampling and skipping frames. We hope to optimize
our code and improve processing time in future versions of
our toolbox. Third, our models likely contain some degree
of bias with respect to gender and race. We have attempted
to use as much high-quality publicly available data as possible to train our models and selected challenging real-world
datasets for benchmarking when available. This problem is
inherent to the field of affective computing and will only
improve as datasets increase in diversity and representation and preprocessing pipelines improve (e.g., faces with
darker pigmentation are often more difficult to detect; Nagpal et al., 2019; Rhue, 2018). Fourth, our toolbox currently
only includes detection of core facial features (i.e., facial
landmarks, action units, and emotions), but there are additional signals in the face that can be informative for social
science researchers. Head pose can be used to detect nodding
or a shaking of the head which can be signals of consent
or dissent in social interactions. Gaze extracted from face
videos can be used to infer the attention of the recorded individual. Heart rate and respiration can also be extracted from
face videos (McDuff et al., 2014) which can be used to infer
arousal or stress levels of the recorded individual. Models
for detecting these facial features could be implemented in
future versions of Py-Feat pending community interest

793
Affective Science (2023) 4:781–796
1 3
The modular architecture of the Py-feat toolbox should
theoretically be able to flexibly accommodate future developments in facial expression research. For example, adding
improved models for our existing detection suite should be
relatively straightforward assuming the models are trained
using pytorch. New functionality can easily be added to the
detector class in the form of a new method. Finally, new
types of data can be accommodated by adding a new data
loader class and data type-specific models. For example, as
3D faces using depth cameras or thermal cameras become
more ubiquitous accompanying rapid developments in virtual and augmented reality research, researchers can train
new models to detect facial expression features, which can
be incorporated into the toolbox without impacting extant
functionality. We also hope that the research community
will contribute new tutorials to our documentation to accelerate the pace of discovery in the field.
In summary, we introduce Py-Feat, an open-source fullstack framework implemented in Python for performing
facial expression analysis from detection, preprocessing,
analysis, and visualization. This work leverages efforts
from the broader affective computing community by relying on high-quality datasets,  state-of-the-art models, and
building on other open source efforts such as OpenFace.
We hope others in the community may be interested in
improving this toolbox by providing feedback and bug
reports and also contributing bug fixes, new models, and
features. We have outlined our contribution guidelines as
well as the necessary code and tutorials on how to replicate our work on our main project website (https://​py-​feat.​
org). We look forward to the increasing synergy between
the fields of computer science and social science and welcome feedback and suggestions from the broader community as we continue to refine and add features to the
Py-Feat platform.
Acknowledgements  The authors would like to acknowledge Filippo
Rossi and Nathaniel Hanes for early discussions of this work. We thank
Mark Thornton, Emma Templeton, and Wasita Mahaphanit for providing feedback on earlier drafts of this paper. We thank Shushi Namba,
Wataru Sato, and Sakiko Yoshikawa for generously sharing their data
with us.
Additional Information
Funding  This work was supported by funding from the National Institute of Mental Health R01MH116026, R56MH080716 and the National
Science Foundation CAREER 1848370.
Conflict of Interest  The authors declare no competing interests.
Code and Data Availability  All the code and data to reproduce the
results are available at https://​py-​feat.​org.
Ethical Approval  No new data were collected for this manuscript. We
refer readers to the referenced dataset papers for approval details.
Informed Consent  No new human participant data was collected for
this manuscript. We refer readers to the referenced dataset papers for
any consent related information.
Supplementary Information  The online version contains supplementary material available at https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s42761-​023-​00191-
4.Open Access   This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in
the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a
copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.
References
Abadi, M., Barham, P., Chen, J., Chen, Z., Davis, A., Dean, J., Devin,
M., Ghemawat, S., Irving, G., Isard, M., Kudlur, M., Levenberg,
J., Monga, R., Moore, S., Murray, D. G., Steiner, B., Tucker, P.,
Vasudevan, V., Warden, P., Wicke, M., Yu, Y., Zheng X. (2016)
Tensorflow: A system for large-scale machine learning. in 12th
${USENIX} symposium on operating systems design and implementation ({OSDI}$ 16) 265–283. Savannah
Abraham,A., Pedregosa, F., Eickenberg, M., Gervais, P., Mueller, A.,
Kossaifi, J., Gramfort, A., Thirion, B., Varoquaux, G. (2014).
Machine learning for neuroimaging with scikit-learn. Frontiers
in Neuroinformatics, 8, 14.
Baltrušaitis, T., Mahmoud, M. & Robinson, P. (2015) Cross-dataset
learning and person-specific normalisation for automatic Action
Unit detection. In 2015 11th IEEE International Conference and
Workshops on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition (FG) 06,
1–6. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​FG.​2015.​72848​69
Baltrusaitis, T., Zadeh, A., Lim, Y. C. & Morency, L. (2018) OpenFace
2.0: Facial behavior analysis toolkit. In 2018 13th IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face Gesture Recognition (FG
2018) 59–66. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​FG.​2018.​00019
Barrett, L. F., Adolphs, R., Marsella, S., Martinez, A. M. & Pollak, S.
D. (2019) Emotional expressions reconsidered: Challenges to
inferring emotion from human facial movements. Psychological
Science in the Public Interest, 20, 1–68 https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​
15291​00619​832930
Benitez-Quiroz, C. F., Srinivasan, R. & Martinez, A. M. (2016). Emotionet: An accurate, real-time algorithm for the automatic annotation of a million facial expressions in the wild. In Proceedings of
the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition
5562–5570. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​CVPR.​2016.​600
Benitez-Quiroz, C. F., Srinivasan, R. & Martinez, A. M. EmotioNet:
An accurate, real-time algorithm for the automatic annotation of
a million facial expressions in the wild. In 2016 IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) 5562–5570
(IEEE, 2016).
Benitez-Quiroz, C. F., Wang, Y. & Martinez, A. M. (2017) Recognition
of action units in the wild with deep nets and a new global-local
loss. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV) 3990–3999

794

Affective Science (2023) 4:781–796
1 3
Benitez-Quiroz, C. F., Srinivasan, R., Feng, Q., Wang, Y. & Martinez, A. M. (2017) EmotioNet Challenge: Recognition of facial
expressions of emotion in the wild. arXiv [cs.CV]
Brockman, G. et al. (2016) OpenAI Gym. arXiv [cs.LG]
Chang, L. J., Jolly, E., Cheong J. H., Rapuano K. M., Greenstein N.,
Chen P-H. A., Manning J.R. (2021) Endogenous variation in
ventromedial prefrontal cortex state dynamics during naturalistic
viewing reflects affective experience. Sci Adv 7
Chang, C.-C., & Lin, C.-J. (2011). LIBSVM: A library for support vector machines. ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., 2, 1–27.
Chang, L. J. et al. (2018) Endogenous variation in ventromedial prefrontal cortex state dynamics during naturalistic viewing reflects
affective experience. bioRxiv 487892 https://​doi.​org/​10.​1101/​
487892
Chang, L. J., Huckins, J., Cheong, J. H., Brietzke, S., Lindquist, M. A.,
Wager, T. D. (2020) ljchang/dartbrains: An online open access
resource for learning functional neuroimaging analysis methods
in Python. https://​doi.​org/​10.​5281/​zenodo.​39097​18.
Chang, L., Manning, J., Baldassano, C., de la Vega, A., Fleetwood, G.,
Geerligs, L., Haxby, J., Lahnakoski, J., Parkinson, C.,Shappell,
H., Shim, W. M., Wager, T., Yarkoni, T., Yeshurun, Y., Finn,
E. (2020) naturalistic-data-analysis/naturalistic_data_analysis:
Version 1.0. https://​doi.​org/​10.​5281/​zenodo.​39378​49.
Chen, P. H. A., Cheong, J. H., Jolly, E., Elhence, H., Wager, T. D.,
Chang, L. J. (2019). Socially transmitted placebo effects. Nature
Human Behaviour, 3, 1295–1305.
Chen, T. & Guestrin, C. (2016). XGBoost: A scalable tree boosting
system. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining 785–794.
Association for Computing Machinery.
Chen, S., Liu, Y., Gao, X. & Han, Z. (2018) MobileFaceNets: Efficient
CNNs for accurate real-time face verification on mobile devices.
arXiv [cs.CV]
Cheong, J. H., Brooks, S. & Chang, L. J. (2019) FaceSync: Open
source framework for recording facial expressions with headmounted cameras. F1000Res
Cheong, J. H., Molani, Z., Sadhukha, S. & Chang, L. J. (2020) Synchronized affect in shared experiences strengthens social connection. https://​doi.​org/​10.​31234/​osf.​io/​bd9wn.
Chipman, P., D'Mello, S. K., Gholson, B., Graesser, A., McDaniel, B.,
Witherspoon, A. (2006) Detection of emotions during learning
with AutoTutor. In Proceedings of the 28th annual meetings of
the cognitive science society 285–290 (Citeseer, 2006).
Cohn, J. F., Ambadar, Z. & Ekman, P. (2007) Observer-based measurement of facial expression with the Facial Action Coding System.
The handbook of emotion elicitation and assessment 203–221
Cowen, A. S., et al. (2021). Sixteen facial expressions occur in similar
contexts worldwide. Nature, 589, 251–257.
Cox, R. W. (1996). AFNI: Software for analysis and visualization of
functional magnetic resonance neuroimages. Computers and Biomedical Research, 29, 162–173.
Dalal, N. & Triggs, B. (2005) Histograms of oriented gradients for
human detection. in 2005 IEEE Computer Society Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR’05) vol.
1 886–893 vol. 1
Darwin, C. (1886) The expression of the emotions in man and animals
Deng, J. et al. (2019) RetinaFace: Single-stage dense face localisation
in the wild. arXiv [cs.CV]
Dhall, A., Goecke, R., Joshi, J., Sikka, K. & Gedeon, T. (214). Emotion recognition in the wild challenge 2014: Baseline, data and
protocol. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference
on Multimodal Interaction 461–466. Association for Computing Machinery.
De la Torre, F., Chu, W. S., Xiong, X., Vicente, F., Ding, X., Cohn J.
(2015) IntraFace. IEEE Int Conf Autom Face Gesture Recognit
Workshops 1
Dupré, D., Krumhuber, E. G., Küster, D., & McKeown, G. J. (2020). A
performance comparison of eight commercially available automatic classifiers for facial affect recognition. PLOS One, 15,
Ekman, P. (1993). Facial expression and emotion. American Psychologist, 48, 384.
Ekman, P. & Friesen, W. (1978) Facial action coding system: a technique for the measurement of facial movement. Palo Alto: Consulting Psychologists
Ekman, P. & Rosenberg, E. L. (1997). What the face reveals: Basic
and applied studies of spontaneous expression using the Facial
Action Coding System (FACS). Oxford University Press.
Executable Books Community. (2020) Jupyter book.. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​5281/​zenodo.​45396​66.
Fanelli, G., Dantone, M., Gall, J., Fossati, A., & Van Gool, L. (2013).
Random forests for real time 3D face analysis. International
Journal of Computer Vision, 101, 437–458.
Fridlund, A. J., Schwartz, G. E., & Fowler, S. C. (1984). Pattern recognition of self-reported emotional state from multiple-site facial
EMG activity during affective imagery. Psychophysiology, 21,
622–637.
Friston, K. J., Frith, C. D., Liddle, P. F., & Frackowiak, R. S. (1991).
Comparing functional (PET) images: The assessment of significant change. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism,
11, 690–699.
Golland, Y., Mevorach, D. & Levit-Binnun, N. (2019) Affiliative zygomatic synchrony in co-present strangers. Scientific Reports vol. 9
Preprint at https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​s41598-​019-​40060-4
Goodfellow, I. J. et al. (2015) Challenges in representation learning:
A report on three machine learning contests. Neural Networks
vol. 64 59–63 Preprint at https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​neunet.​2014.​
09.​005
Guo, X., Li, S., Yu, J., Zhang, J., Ma, J., Ma, L., Liu, W., Ling
H. (2019) PFLD: A practical facial landmark detector. arXiv [cs.
CV]. https://​doi.​org/​10.​48550/​arXiv.​1902.​10859
Haines, N., Southward, M. W., Cheavens, J. S., Beauchaine, T., & Ahn,
W.-Y. (2019). Using computer-vision and machine learning to
automate facial coding of positive and negative affect intensity.
PLOS One, 14,
Haines, N., Rass, O,. Shin, Y-W., Busemeyer, J. R., Brown, J. W.,
O’Donnell, B. F., Ahn W-Y. (2019) Regret induces rapid learning
from experience-based decisions: A model-based facial expression analysis approach. bioRxiv 560011 https://​doi.​org/​10.​1101/​
560011
Harris, C.R., Millman, K.J., van der Walt, S. V., Gommers, R., Virtanen, P., Cournapeau, D., Wieser, E., Taylor, J., Berg, S., Smith,
N. J., Kern, R., Picus, M., Hoyer, S., van Kerkwijk, M. H., Brett,
M., Haldane, A., Fernández del Río, J., Wiebe, M., Peterson, P.,
Gérard-Marchant, P., Sheppard, K., Reddy, T., Weckesser, W.,
Abbasi, H., Gohlke C., & Oliphant T. E. (2020). Array programming with NumPy. Nature, 585, 357–362.
Höfling, T. T. A., Gerdes, A. B. M., Föhl, U., & Alpers, G. W. (2020).
Read my face: Automatic facial coding versus psychophysiological indicators of emotional valence and arousal. Frontiers in Psychology, 11, 1388.
Howard, A. G., Zhu, M., Chen, Bo., Kalenichenko, D., Wang, W., Weyand, T., Andreetto, M., Adam H. (2017) MobileNets: Efficient
convolutional neural networks for mobile vision applications.
arXiv [cs.CV].
Hunter. (2007) Matplotlib: A 2D graphics environment. 9, 90–95
iMotions Biometric Research Platform 6.0. (iMotions A/S, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2016).

795
Affective Science (2023) 4:781–796
1 3
Jack, R. E., Garrod, O. G. B., Yu, H., Caldara, R., & Schyns, P. G.
(2012). Facial expressions of emotion are not culturally universal. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. u. s. a., 109, 7241–7244.
Jack, R. E., Garrod, O. G. B., & Schyns, P. G. (2014). Dynamic facial
expressions of emotion transmit an evolving hierarchy of signals
over time. Current Biology, 24, 187–192.
Jenkinson, M., Beckmann, C. F., Behrens, T. E. J., Woolrich, M. W., &
Smith, S. M. (2012). FSL. Neuroimage, 62, 782–790.
Jones, E., Oliphant, T. & Peterson, P.  (2001). SciPy: Open source scientific tools for Python. Preprint at http://​www.​scipy.​org.
Kachur, A., Osin, E., Davydov, D., Shutilov, K., & Novokshonov, A.
(2020). Assessing the Big Five personality traits using real-life
static facial images. Science  Reports, 10, 8487.
Kanade, T., Cohn, J. F. & Yingli Tian. (2000). Comprehensive database
for facial expression analysis. In Proceedings Fourth IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition (Cat. No. PR00580) 46–53. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​AFGR.​
2000.​840611
Kilbride, J. E., & Yarczower, M. (1983). Ethnic bias in the recognition
of facial expressions. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 8, 27–41.
Kosinski, M. (2021). Facial recognition technology can expose political orientation from naturalistic facial images. Science  Reports,
11, 100.
Krumhuber, E. G., Skora, L., Küster, D., & Fou, L. (2017). A review of
dynamic datasets for facial expression research. Emotion Review,
9, 280–292.
Krumhuber, E. G., Küster, D., Namba, S., & Skora, L. (2020). Human
and machine validation of 14 databases of dynamic facial expressions. Behavior Research Methods. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3758/​
s13428-​020-​01443-y
Krumhuber, E. G., Küster, D., Namba, S., Shah, D., & Calvo, M.
G. (2021). Emotion recognition from posed and spontaneous
dynamic expressions: Human observers versus machine analysis.
Emotion, 21, 447–451.
Larsen, J. T., Norris, C. J., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2003). Effects of positive and negative affect on electromyographic activity over zygomaticus major and corrugator supercilii. Psychophysiology, 40,
776–785.
Littlewort, G. C., Bartlett, M. S., & Lee, K. (2009). Automatic coding
of facial expressions displayed during posed and genuine pain.
Image and Vision Computing, 27, 1797–1803.
Littlewort, G., Wu, T., Whitehill, J., Fasel, I., Movellan, J., Bartlett M.
(2011). The computer expression recognition toolbox (CERT). In
2011 IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face Gesture
Recognition (FG) 298–305 (ieeexplore.ieee.org, 2011). https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1109/​FG.​2011.​57714​14
Luan, P., Huynh, V. & Tuan Anh, T. (2020) Facial expression recognition using residual masking network. In IEEE 25th International
Conference on Pattern Recognition 4513–4519. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1109/​ICPR4​8806.​2021.​94119​19
Lucey, P., Cohn, J. F., Prkachin, K. M., Solomon, P. E. & Matthews,
I (2011a) Painful data: The UNBC-McMaster shoulder pain
expression archive database. In 2011a IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face Gesture Recognition (FG) 57–64.
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​FG.​2011.​57714​62
Lucey, P. , Cohn, J. F., Kanade, T., Saragih, J., Ambadar Z., & Matthews I. (2010) The extended Cohn-Kanade dataset (CK+): A
complete dataset for action unit and emotion-specified expression. In 2010 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition - Workshops (IEEE, 2010b).
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​cvprw.​2010.​55432​62.
Lyons, M., Kamachi, M. & Gyoba, J. The Japanese Female Facial
Expression (JAFFE) Dataset. (1998). https://​doi.​org/​10.​5281/​
zenodo.​34515​24.
Mavadati, S. M., Mahoor, M. H., Bartlett, K., Trinh, P., & Cohn, J. F.
(2013). DISFA: A spontaneous facial action intensity database.
IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing, 4, 151–160.
Mavadati, M., Sanger, P. & Mahoor, M. H. (2016) Extended DISFA
dataset: Investigating posed and spontaneous facial expressions.
In 2016b IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW) 1452–1459
McDuff, D., Gontarek, S. & Picard, R. (2014) Remote measurement of
cognitive stress via heart rate variability. Conference of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. 2014, 2957–2960
McDuff, D. J., Mahmoud, A., Mavadati, M., Amr, M., Turcot, J.,
Kaliouby, R. E. (2016) AFFDEX SDK: A cross-platform realtime multi-face expression recognition toolkit. In Proceedings of
the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors
in Computing Systems 3723–3726 (Association for Computing
Machinery, 2016).
McKinney, W. (2011) Pandas: A foundational Python library for data
analysis and statistics. Python for High Performance and Scientific Computing 14, 1–9
Mollahosseini, A., Hasani, B., & Mahoor, M. H. (2019). AffectNet: A
database for facial expression, valence, and arousal computing in
the wild. IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing, 10, 18–31.
Nagpal, S., Singh, M., Singh, R. & Vatsa, M. (2019) Deep learning for
face recognition: Pride or prejudiced? arXiv [cs.CV]
Namba, S., Sato, W. & Yoshikawa, S. (2021) Viewpoint robustness of
automated facial action unit detection systems. NATO Adv. Sci.
Inst. Ser. E Appl. Sci. 11, 11171
Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., Lerer, A., Bradbury, J., Chanan, G.,
Killeen, T., Lin, Z., Gimelshein, N., Antiga, L., Desmaison, A.,
Köpf, A., Yang, E., DeVito, Z., Raison, M., Tejani, A., Chilamkurthy, S., Steiner, B., Fang, L., Bai, J., Chintala, S. (2019)
PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning
library. arXiv [cs.LG]
Pedregosa, A., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., Michel, V., Thirion, B.,
Grisel, O., Blondel, M., Prettenhofer, P., Weiss, R., Dubourg, V.,
Vanderplas, J., Passos, A., Cournapeau, D., Brucher, M., Perrot, M., Duchesnay E. (2011). Scikit-learn: Machine learning in
Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12, 2825–2830.
Penton-Voak, I. S., Pound, N., Little, A. C., & Perrett, D. I. (2006).
Personality judgments from natural and composite facial images:
More evidence for a ‘kernel of truth’ in social perception. Social
Cognition, 24, 607–640.
Qi, P., Zhang, Y., Zhang, Y., Bolton, J. & Manning, C. D. (2020)
Stanza: A Python natural language processing toolkit for many
human languages. arXiv [cs.CL]
Rhue, L. (2018) Racial influence on automated perceptions of emotions. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2139/​ssrn.​32817​65
Sagonas, C., Antonakos, E., Tzimiropoulos, G., Zafeiriou, S., & Pantic, M. (2016). 300 Faces In-The-Wild Challenge: Database and
results. Image and Vision Computing, 47, 3–18.
Sagonas, C., Tzimiropoulos, G., Zafeiriou, S. & Pantic, M. A (2013a)
semi-automatic methodology for facial landmark annotation.
In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition workshops 896–903. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​
CVPRW.​2013.​132
Sagonas, C., Tzimiropoulos, G., Zafeiriou, S. & Pantic, M. 300 faces
in-the-wild challenge: The first facial landmark localization challenge. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on
computer vision workshops 397–403 (cv-foundation.org, 2013b).
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ICCVW.​2013.​59
Saxe, R., & Houlihan, S. D. (2017). Formalizing emotion concepts
within a Bayesian model of theory of mind. Current Opinion in
Psychology, 17, 15–21.
Sayette M. A., Creswell, K. G., Dimoff, J. D., Fairbairn, C. E., Cohn,
J. F., Heckman, B. W., Kirchner, T. R., Levine, J. M., Moreland R. L. (2012). Alcohol and group formation: A multimodal

796

Affective Science (2023) 4:781–796
1 3
investigation of the effects of alcohol on emotion and social
bonding. Psychological Science, 23, 869–878.
Sayette, M. A., Cohn, J. F., Wertz, J. M. & Perrott, M. A. A (2001)
psychometric evaluation of the facial action coding system for
assessing spontaneous expression. J. Nonverbal Behav
Segalin, C. et al. (2017) What your Facebook profile picture reveals
about your personality. Proceedings of the 25th ACM international conference on Multimedia Preprint at https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1145/​31232​66.​31233​31
Shen, J., Zafeiriou, S., Chrysos, G. G., Kossaifi, J., Tzimiropoulos
G., Pantic M. (2015) The first facial landmark tracking in-thewild challenge: Benchmark and results. in Proceedings of the
IEEE international conference on computer vision workshops
50–58
Stöckli, S., Schulte-Mecklenbeck, M., Borer, S., & Samson, A.
C. (2018). Facial expression analysis with AFFDEX and
FACET: A validation study. Behavior Research Methods, 50,
1446–1460.
Tzimiropoulos, G., Alabort-i-Medina, J., Zafeiriou, S. P., & Pantic, M. (2014). Active orientation models for face alignment
in-the-wild. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and
Security, 9, 2024–2034.
Tzimiropoulos, G., Alabort-i-Medina, J., Zafeiriou, S. & Pantic,
M. Generic active appearance models revisited. in Computer
Vision – ACCV 2012 650–663 (Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2013). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​642-​37431-9_​50
van der Walt, S., Schönberger, J. L., Nunez-Iglesias, J., Boulogne,
F., Warner, J. D., Yager, N., Gouillart, E., Yu, T., scikit-image
contributors. (2014). Scikit-image: Image processing in
Python. PeerJ, 2, e453.
Van Kuilenburg, H., Den Uyl, M. J., Israël, M. L., & Ivan, P. (2008).
Advances in face and gesture analysis. Measuring Behavior,
2008, 371.
Vemulapalli, R. & Agarwala, A. A compact embedding for facial
expression similarity. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 5683–5692
(openaccess.thecvf.com, 2019).  https://​doi.​org/​10.​48550/​
arXiv.​1811.​11283
Wang, Y., Ma, J., Hao, B., Hu, P., Wang, X., Mei, J., Li S. (2014) Predicting movie ratings from audience behaviors. in IEEE Winter
Conference on Applications of Computer Vision 1058–1065
Wang, Y., Ma, J., Hao, B., Hu, P., Wang X., Mei, J., Li, S., (2020)
Automatic depression detection via facial expressions using multiple instance learning. in 2020 IEEE 17th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI) 1933–1936. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1109/​ISBI4​5749.​2020.​90983​96
Waskom, M. (2021). Seaborn: Statistical data visualization. J. Open
Source Softw., 6, 3021.
Watson, D. M., Brown, B. B., & Johnston, A. (2020). A data-driven
characterisation of natural facial expressions when giving good
and bad news. PLOS Computational Biology, 16,
Werner, P., Al-Hamadi, A., Limbrecht-Ecklundt, K., Walter, S., Gruss
S., Traue, H. C. (2017). Automatic pain assessment with facial
activity descriptors. IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing,
8, 286–299.
Worsley, K. J., & Friston, K. J. (1995). Analysis of fMRI time-series
revisited—Again. NeuroImage, 2, 173–181.
Xiong, X. & De la Torre, F. (2013) Supervised descent method and
its applications to face alignment. In 2013 IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 532–539
Yang, S., Luo, P., Loy, C.-C. & Tang, X. (2016) Wider face: A face
detection benchmark. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition 5525–5533
Yitzhak, N., Giladi, N., Gurevich, T., Messinger, D. S., Prince, E. B.,
Martin, K., Aviezer H. (2017). Gently does it: Humans outperform a software classifier in recognizing subtle, nonstereotypical
facial expressions. Emotion, 17, 1187–1198.
Zhang, X., Yin, L., Cohn, J. F., Canavan, S., Reale, M., Horowitz, A.,
Liu, P., & Girard, J. M. (2014). BP4D-Spontaneous: A highresolution spontaneous 3D dynamic facial expression database.
Image and Vision Computing, 32, 692–706.
Zhang, Z., Luo, P., Loy, C. C., & Tang, X. (2018). From facial expression recognition to interpersonal relation prediction. International Journal of Computer Vision, 126, 550–569.
Zhang, L., Gui, G., Khattak, A. M., Wang, M., Gao W., & Jia J. (2019).
Multi-task cascaded convolutional networks based intelligent
fruit detection for designing automated robot. IEEE Access, 7,
56028–56038.
Zhang, N., Luo, J. & Gao, W. (2020) Research on face detection technology based on MTCNN. in 2020 International Conference
on Computer Network, Electronic and Automation (ICCNEA)
154–158
Zhang, Z., Girard, J. M., Wu, Y., Zhang, X., Liu, P., Ciftci, U., Canavan, S., Reale, M., Horowitz, A., Yang, H., Cohn, J. F., Ji, Q., Yin
L. (2016a) Multimodal spontaneous emotion corpus for human
behavior analysis. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 3438–3446
Zhang, S., Zhu, X., Lei, Z., Shi, H., Wang, H., Li S. Z. (2017) Face-
Boxes: A CPU real-time face detector with high accuracy. in
2017 IEEE International Joint Conference on Biometrics (IJCB)
1–9
