1
Assessing the Efficacy of Deep Learning
Approaches for Facial Expression Recognition in
Individuals with Intellectual Disabilities
F. Xavier Gaya-Morey
, Silvia Ramis
, Jose M. Buades-Rubio
, Cristina Manresa-Yee
Abstract—Facial expression recognition has gained significance
as a means of imparting social robots with the capacity to discern
the emotional states of users. The use of social robotics includes
a variety of settings, including homes, nursing homes or daycare
centers, serving to a wide range of users. Remarkable performance has been achieved by deep learning approaches, however,
its direct use for recognizing facial expressions in individuals with
intellectual disabilities has not been yet studied in the literature,
to the best of our knowledge. To address this objective, we train a
set of 12 convolutional neural networks in different approaches,
including an ensemble of datasets without individuals with
intellectual disabilities and a dataset featuring such individuals.
Our examination of the outcomes, both the performance and
the important image regions for the models, reveals significant
distinctions in facial expressions between individuals with and
without intellectual disabilities, as well as among individuals with
intellectual disabilities. Remarkably, our findings show the need
of facial expression recognition within this population through
tailored user-specific training methodologies, which enable the
models to effectively address the unique expressions of each user.
Index Terms—Facial expression recognition, explainable artificial intelligence, computer vision, deep learning, intellectual
disabilities
I. INTRODUCTION
Understanding the emotional state of people is important
both on an individual and societal level. This understanding
allows an effective communication, promotes empathy, or
enhances social dynamics, among others. Non-verbal communication through body language is a powerful form of communication that offers insights into the individual’s emotional
state [1]. Within the body language, facial expressions stand
out as a particularly significant component and although facial
expressions are not emotions themselves [2], they provide a
compelling visual representation. Providing artificial cognitive
systems, such as social robots, with the ability to discern
emotions can enhance the user experience in social contexts
[3], [4]. Research in affective computing has notably focused
on automated facial expression recognition (FER), that is, the
identification and analysis of human facial expressions [5]–[7].
F. Xavier Gaya-Morey, Silvia Ramis, Jose M. Buades-Rubio and Cristina
Manresa-Yee are with the Computer Graphics and Vision and AI Group
(UGIVIA) and the Research Institute of Health Sciences (IUNICS), from
the Universitat de les Illes Balears, Carretera de Valldemossa, km 7.5, Palma,
07122, Illes Balears, Spain.
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication.
Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which this version may
no longer be accessible.
A significant body of research builds upon Ekman’s six fundamental and universally recognized facial expressions: anger,
happiness, surprise, disgust, sadness, and fear [8], although
their universality has been a topic of debate [9] and they do
not express the wide range of expressions that humans can do.
Examples of applications of automated FER extend across an
array of domains, including medical diagnosis and treatment
[10], as well as its integration into the fields of Human-
Computer Interaction (HCI) and Human-Robot Interaction
(HRI) [11], [12].
Deep learning (DL), particularly Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), has recently emerged in the FER domain [7].
These DL models have demonstrated remarkable performance,
often attaining state-of-the-art results in FER tasks. This transition to DL signifies a paradigm shift from early FER research,
which focused on facial feature extraction and the analysis of
facial appearance [13], [14]. The adoption of DL techniques
has achieved important advancements in FER; however, these
techniques often require large amounts of high-quality labeled
data for training to generalize well to new, unseen cases.
In the case of people with intellectual disability, that is,
people that present limitations in their ability to learn at an
expected level and function in daily life, the identification
of facial expressions is an important challenge [15], especially for those that present verbal communication limitations
[16]. Understanding how this population feels is of utmost
importance as it can indicate discomfort, sadness or pain. The
severity of their limitations can vary widely [17], and the
literature shows that their facial expressions may differ from
those without intellectual disabilities [18]–[20]. The direct
application of existing FER systems for this population would
speed up the design of behavioral and cognitive capabilities
in artificial agents at homes, nursing homes, day care centers
or hospitals. However, a notable gap persists in the literature
regarding comprehensive studies assessing the applicability of
these systems to people with intellectual disabilities. Further,
there is a lack of tailored solutions specifically addressing the
needs of this population, likely due to the scarcity of highquality datasets.
In this work, we articulate three central research questions:
1) Can DL models, originally trained with standard datasets
of facial expressions, yield proficient performance when
applied to individuals with intellectual disabilities? (Q1)
2) Can DL models, specifically trained on a dataset comprising individuals with intellectual disabilities, accurately predict the facial expressions of other individuals
arXiv:2401.11877v2  [cs.CV]  29 May 2024

2
with intellectual disabilities? (Q2)
3) What disparities and commonalities exist in the facial
expressions of individuals with and without intellectual
disabilities, learned by DL models? (Q3)
Answering these questions can provide substantial benefits
across several domains, including inclusivity or adaptability.
By assessing whether DL models trained on standard datasets
perform adequately when applied to individuals with intellectual disabilities, we can identify any gaps in inclusivity
and establish a performance baseline for existing technologies.
This helps in understanding whether current AI systems can
be deployed more broadly without extensive customization,
enhancing their accessibility and cost-effectiveness. Secondly,
evaluating models specifically trained on data from individuals
with intellectual disabilities can lead to increased accuracy
and customization in AI interactions, ensuring the technology
is sensitive to the group characteristics. Lastly, exploring the
differences and commonalities in facial expressions between
individuals with and without intellectual disabilities enriches
our understanding of AI’s ability to interpret human emotions
universally. This knowledge is vital for improving dataset
compilation or designing fairer AI systems.
The work is organized as follows: Section II presents a
comprehensive review of related works, highlighting the lack
of FER-related works using DL techniques for people with
intellectual disabilities. Section III describes the methodological approach, encompassing dataset curation, model selection,
data preprocessing, an overview of our XAI strategy, and a
description of the experiments conducted. We then present
in Section IV and V our empirical findings and results, and
present a comprehensive discussion of these outcomes. Finally,
we summarize the main findings and present future work lines.
II. RELATED WORK
Recent years have witnessed remarkable developments in
FER, with a shift towards the application of DL techniques,
particularly CNNs [21]. Current research works show the
efficacy of these systems achieving high performance recognizing from 6 to 8 facial expressions over well-known datasets
such as CK+ or JAFFE [7]. These datasets, comprised by
actor posed expressions or labelled images, do not specifically
inform about the disabilities.
Considering people with moderate to severe intellectual
impairments, who can present differences when producing
facial expressions, we find a scarce number of works that
aim at recognizing automatically their basic facial expressions,
especially with DL techniques.
Working in a similar line addressed to people with profound
intellectual and multiple disabilities (PIMD), Campomanes-
´Alvarez and Campomanes- ´Alvarez [22] designed a recognizer
based on analyzing the changes in the appearance of three
face regions -eyes, mouth and jaw- using different techniques
on each zone (e.g. random forest, k-nearest neighbour, na¨ıve
bayes, logistic regression, neural network). They built four
datasets, labeled with the regions’ appearance, to test each
recognizer: one with 375 samples for the eyes and the eyebrows which included 6 people with PIMD and 5 other people,
one for the mouth with 375 samples which included 6 people
and examples from CK+; and one for the jaw region with
1378 samples, that included 5 people. Labels for each zone
indicated appearance comprising different states for the eyes
(closed, semi, widened, winking or neutral), the eyebrows
(frown, raising or neutral), the mouth (corners of mouth up,
corner of mouth down, mouth wide open, lips movements
and neutral state) and the jaw (grinding, biting, drooping
and no-movement). Their results were promising, however,
the evaluation did not include the basic facial expressions
identifications and the datasets were lacking in the inclusion
of individuals with PIMD.
Dovgan et al. [23] developed a decision support system
(DSS) to recognize behaviour patterns, including facial expressions, of two persons with PIMD. They used 8 machine
learning techniques (e.g. random forest, support vector machine, K-nearest neighbours) and a set of rules informed by
experts (e.g. caregivers). They fused the techniques using an
ensemble approach, achieving 12 ensembles. Their results
were modest when classifying the inner state (neutral, pleasure
or displeasure) of the individuals (max. accuracy of 62.4
for one case and 69.3 for the other one). They commented
limitations such as difficulties in the label annotations (even
for caregivers), unbalanced data, facial expressions not well
recognized by the system due to the conditions of the recordings (the experiment took place during normal care activities),
informative behaviours for the caregivers that are not always
recognized by the system or inconsistency in the person’s
behaviour.
Addressing other populations which present intellectual
impairments, whose facial expressions may be similar to
the ones of people without disabilities [24], Paredes et al.
[25] built a system based on CNNs aiming at identifying
anger, happiness, sadness, surprise, and neutrality in people
with Down Syndrome. They compiled a dataset including
1200 images of 8- to 12-year-old Down syndrome individuals
displaying spontaneous emotions with their therapist or tutor
during daily activities and achieved an average accuracy of
91.4%, with happiness being the best recognized expression.
Despite advances in FER, the research literature reveals
a shortage of studies focused on the direct application of
FER models to diverse populations, such as individuals with
intellectual disabilities.
III. METHODS
This section describes the datasets, image processing procedures, DL models, and XAI techniques employed in this study.
Additionally, it outlines the various experiments conducted to
address the research questions.
A. Datasets
Seven datasets were employed in this study, which can be
found in Table I. The initial four datasets are well-established
benchmarks commonly used in FER research, namely the
Extended Cohn-Kanade (CK+) [26], BU-4DFE [27], JAFFE
[28], and WSEFEP [29] datasets. The CK+ dataset comprises

3
TABLE I
DETAILED LIST OF DATASETS USED IN THE STUDY.
Details
Data
Classes
Used for
Name
Ref.
Year
Authors
Users
Samples
Data type
Happiness
Sadness
Anger
Disgust
Fear
Surprise
Neutral
Contempt
Training
Testing
FEGA
[30]
2022
Ramis et al.
51
1668
Image
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✗
✓
✗
FE-Test
[30]
2022
Ramis et al.
210
210
Image
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✗
✗
✓
MuDERI
[31]
2016
Shukla et al.
12
24
Video
✓
✓
✓
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✓
✓
WSEFEP
[29]
2014
Olszanowski et al.
30
210
Image
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✗
✓
✗
CK+
[26]
2010
Lucey et al.
123
593
Video
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✗
✓
✓
✗
BU-4DFE
[27]
2006
Yin et al.
101
606
Video
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✗
✗
✓
✗
JAFFE
[28]
1998
Lyons et al.
10
213
Image
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✗
✓
✗
593 sequences collected from 123 subjects, with each sequence labeled with one out of seven facial expressions: anger,
contempt, disgust, fear, happiness, sadness, and surprise. On
the other hand, the BU-4DFE dataset includes 606 sequences
from 101 subjects, each subject contributing six sequences,
one for each facial expression (anger, disgust, fear, happiness,
sadness, and surprise). The JAFFE and WSEFEP datasets
also offer a neutral class, in addition to these six facial
expressions. The first one encompasses 213 images taken from
10 female Japanese actresses, while the second one comprises
210 images from 30 individuals.
Two additional datasets were included in the study: FEGA
and FE-test [30]. The FEGA dataset is noteworthy for its
multi-label annotations, including facial expression, gender,
and age. This dataset involves 51 subjects, each performing
the same seven facial expressions as JAFFE and WSEFEP,
with eight repetitions for each expression, resulting in multiple
snapshots. Conversely, the FE-test dataset consists of 210
frontal images captured ”in the wild”. For the experiments,
we merged the BU-4DFE, JAFFE, WSEFEPF, CK+ and FEGA
datasets, this union will be referred to with the name of ”FER-
DB5”, for simplicity.
Lastly, the study also made use of the MuDERI dataset
[31]. The MuDERI dataset is a comprehensive multimodal
database featuring 12 participants with intellectual disabilities.
This dataset encompasses two audio-visual recordings for each
participant. In the first recording, participants were exposed
to positive stimuli to elicit positive emotions, while the second recording involved negative stimuli to evoke negative
emotions. These videos are segmented by timestamps, and
each timestamp is annotated with three facial expressions:
happiness, sadness, and anger. Additionally, the dataset includes annotations of electroencephalography (EEG) signals,
electrodermal activity (EDA) signals, and Kinect data that
were synchronized with the audio-visual recordings using
these timestamps.
B. Image preprocessing
To facilitate the FER task to the models, we applied preprocessing to the images, comprising face detection, alignment,
and cropping. The face detection is performed using the ”a
contrario” framework, a method proposed by Lisani et al. [32].
Then, we employed the 68 facial landmarks, as outlined by
Sagonas et al. [33], to precisely locate the positions of the eyes
and achieve facial alignment. This process involved calculating
the geometric centroids of each eye to compute the necessary
rotation angle for horizontal alignment of the eyes. After the
facial alignment, we performed cropping to isolate the facial
region of interest and then resized the images to match the
specific dimensions required for compatibility with the CNNs
employed in this research.
C. Models
A set of twelve neural network models was constructed
for the classification of three basic facial expressions. These
models encompass both widely recognized architectures and
CNNs tailored explicitly for Facial Expression Recognition
(FER). The nine established models are AlexNet [34], VGG16
and VGG19 [35], ResNet50 and ResNet101V2 [36], InceptionV3 [37], Xception [38], MobileNetV3 [39], and Efficient-
NetV2 [40]. The three specialized FER models are: SilNet
[30], SongNet [41], and WeiNet [42], denoted as such for
convenience.
All of these CNNs underwent training and evaluation using
the datasets detailed in subsection III-A, following the preprocessing steps outlined in subsection III-B. The selection of
models presents a variety of architectures whose exploration
and performance assessment could offer valuable insights to
the research.
All code was written in Python, and the Keras library was
used to implement the AlexNet, WeiNet, SongNet and SilNet
models layer by layer. The remaining models were directly
accessible using the Keras API, along with their pre-trained
weights on ImageNet.
D. XAI approach
To obtain further insights into the inner workings of the
models when performing the FER task, we employed the XAI
technique introduced in [43], which obtains global per-class
explanations by normalizing LIME explanations [44].
LIME stands for Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations, and consists on the perturbation of different regions
at image level, to infer the relevance of each region for
the outputted prediction. We used SLIC [45] to segment
the images and obtain the regions (approximately 30), dark
color to occlude the regions, and 1,000 samples for each

4
explanation. For the sake of simplicity, we focused on the
positive relevance, omitting the negative one.
Then, following the procedure described in [43], we fit
all explanations onto a normalized space, where all face
landmarks are located at the same coordinates. This allows
for the aggregation of multiple explanations into different heat
maps, by classes and by networks, to better understand the key
regions used by the models in each case.
E. Experiments
In this section, we provide a comprehensive overview of the
three experiments conducted to address the research questions
posed in this study.
1) First experiment: Training on FER datasets: In the first
experiment, we extended upon the methodology introduced in
[46] across the entire set of networks detailed in Section III-C.
The objective was to answer Q1, evaluating whether diverse
networks, trained on extended datasets designed for the FER
task, could accurately classify facial expressions in individuals
with intellectual disabilities from the MuDERI dataset.
This experiment included k trainings with k = 15 on FER-
DB5, which combines five FER datasets (CK+, BU-4DFE,
JAFFE, WSEFEP, and FEGA, as detailed in Section III-A).
Each training was subjected to two evaluations: one on Google
FE-Test and another on MuDERI. This evaluation aimed to
validate the models on dissimilar datasets —one involving
users with intellectual disabilities and the other without them.
Additionally, k trainings, also with k = 15, were performed on
the full MuDERI dataset, followed by evaluations on Google
FE-Test. This second set of trainings allowed to investigate in
more depth the inherent differences between the Google FE-
Test and MuDERI datasets. The value for k was set sufficiently
big to enhance the robustness of the performance assessment
and mitigate the impact of individual training variations.
2) Second experiment: training on MuDERI: The second
experiment targeted the research question Q2 and involved
training and evaluating models directly on the MuDERI
dataset. Four distinct scenarios were explored based on the
split between training and test sets considering users, clips
and frames (see Figure 1). This granular decomposition of the
experiment aimed at controlling the limitations of the MuDERI
dataset and explore various possibilities when dealing with
individuals with intellectual disabilities. The scenarios were
the following:
1) User-based Split: Training was conducted on a partition
of MuDERI where the split was performed by users,
training on some users and evaluating on the remaining
ones.
2) Clip-based Split (Full Exposure): The split was done
by clips, ensuring that models were exposed to all
users in the training, thereby providing insights to userspecific facial expressions. The clips were randomly
selected for the training or testing set.
3) Clip-based Split (Restricted Exposure): The split was
done by clips, ensuring that models were exposed to all
users in the training. However, in this case, the training
set included all users and all classes. This aimed at
assessing the model’s ability to recognize expressions
for a user only if it has encountered other clips of the
same user and class during training. Exceptionally, in
the case of users with only a single clip for a specific
class, this clip was only included in the training set, not
the test set.
4) Frame-based Split: The split was performed by frames,
allowing adjacent frames to randomly fall into the training or testing sets.
Fig. 1. Considerations for the scenarios: each user has video clips for each
expression (happiness, sadness and anger). The clips are then divided into
frames.
3) Third experiment: explaining results: In the final experiment, we explored the differences in regions used by
the models to identify facial expressions. We accomplished
this by comparing the resulting heat maps by network and
class, from two distinct trainings: one on FER-DB5 and the
other on MuDERI (clip-based split with restricted exposure).
This comparison aimed at understanding the similarities and
dissimilarities in FER for individuals with and without intellectual disabilities. Furthermore, for the trainings on FER-
DB5, we presented heat maps computed by testing the models
on Google FE-Test and MuDERI. This enables the observation
of differences in important regions when the same models are
employed for users with and without intellectual disabilities.
IV. RESULTS
In this section, we present the results achieved in the
experiments described in the previous section.
A. First experiment: training on FER datasets
Figure 2 depicts the results of the evaluation of the trainings
on the FER-DB5 dataset on Google FE-Test and MuDERI.
The box plot illustrates the spread of results through different
trainings, showcasing the median, quartiles, and outliers for
each network.
Based on the results, we present the following findings:
• None of the networks achieved satisfactory results on
the MuDERI dataset, with accuracies consistently below
55%.
• Almost all networks, excluding ResNet50, performed
well on the Google FE-Test, with accuracies exceeding
80% in most cases.
• ResNet50
exhibited
inconsistent
performance
across
trainings, with one achieving accuracy above 80% on
Google FE-Test.
• Trainings on MuDERI displayed larger box and whiskers
compared to FER-DB5 for eight out of twelve networks,
indicating higher variation in accuracy between iterations.

5
Fig. 2.
Box-plot showing the accuracy by network and evaluation dataset
for the k = 15 trainings on FER-DB5. The big gap in accuracy between
evaluating the models on Google FE-Test and on MuDERI can be appreciated.
In Figure 3, a box plot illustrates the accuracy of k = 15
trainings on FER-DB5 and MuDERI, evaluated on Google
FE-Test. Results indicate poor performance for trainings on
MuDERI, with accuracies mostly below 40%.
Fig. 3.
Accuracy on the Google FE-Test dataset of the k (with k = 15)
trainings performed on FER-DB5 and MuDERI, by network. In this case,
the low performance on Google FE-Test of the models trained on MuDERI
should be noted.
To explore the results on MuDERI further, Figure 4 displays
the average per-class F1 score on Google FE-Test. Significantly, the ”happiness” class dominates detections, leading to
low recall and F1 scores for other classes.
B. Second experiment: training on MuDERI
Figures 5 and 6 depict the accuracy and F1 score, respectively, of different training scenarios on MuDERI, alongside
results obtained by FER-DB5 trainings on average.
The figures provide the following insights:
• The 1st training scenario (user-based split) yields the
worst results, close to those achieved by FER-DB5 trainings.
Fig. 4.
Average per-class F1 score obtained on Google FE-Test by the
trainings on MuDERI. Note the great difference among classes.
• The 2nd and 3rd scenarios (clip-based split) show similar
accuracy, with the 3rd scenario performing over 10%
better on the F1 score for all networks.
• The 4th scenario (frame-based split) attains the highest
accuracy, but potential overfitting is suspected due to the
similarity of consecutive frames.
• Training scenarios exhibit consistent results across different networks, except for MobileNetV3.
• EfficientNetV2 excels in the 1st scenario but underperforms in the 4th. MobileNetV3 consistently records the
worst results.
These findings offer insights into the varying effectiveness
of different training scenarios on MuDERI and highlight small
network-specific performance variations.
C. Third experiment: explaining results
In Figure 7 we display heat maps for all classes and
networks, computed for the training on FEER-DB5 tested on
Google FE-Test and MuDERI, and for the training and test on
MuDERI. The following aspects can be observed:
• Training Set Influence: The choice of the training set
significantly impacts the resulting heat maps, leading
to notable distinctions between trainings on FER-DB5
and MuDERI. Heat maps generated on MuDERI appear
less intuitive and, in some instances, exhibit a degree of
complexity.
• Test Set Influence: There are many similarities between
heat maps for a specific network, class, and training set
across various test sets.
• Network Influence: Considerable variation exists in the
learned features across models, particularly notable for
”Sadness” and ”Anger” expressions and for the four
networks without pre-trained weights (SilNet, WeiNet,
AlexNet, and SongNet). However, some common patterns
emerge, contingent on the training set, with clearer trends
observed for the ”Happiness” class trained on FER-DB5.
• Class Influence: Differences between classes are more
pronounced in models trained on the MuDERI dataset.
Conversely, models trained on FER-DB5 tend to emphasize certain facial features such as the mouth (especially

6
Fig. 5. Accuracy of the different training scenarios on MuDERI, by network. We have added the average results obtained by the 15 trainings on FER-DB5
for comparison.
Fig. 6. F1 score of the different training scenarios on MuDERI, by network. We have added the average results obtained by the 15 trainings on FER-DB5
for comparison.
for ”Happiness”), nose, eyes, and, in some cases, even
the cheeks, chin, and forehead.
V. DISCUSSION
A. Can DL models, originally trained with standard datasets
of facial expressions, yield proficient performance when applied to individuals with intellectual disabilities?(Q1)
The outcomes derived from the initial experiment indicate
the impracticality of achieving proficient performance with
DL models initially trained on conventional datasets of facial expressions when applied to individuals with intellectual
disabilities. After training on an ensemble of five datasets for
FER, the accuracy achieved by the different models remained
high (approximately 90%) despite changing the dataset used
for evaluation to Google FE-Test, showcasing a proper generalization of the networks, and unlocking their use for unseen
users and data. However, this adaptability did not extend to
the MuDERI dataset, exclusively comprising individuals with
intellectual disabilities, as evidenced by a significant drop in
accuracy to below 50% across all networks. This suggests
that the facial expressions of individuals with intellectual
disabilities exhibit unique characteristics that are not well
captured by the standard datasets.
Furthermore, the opposite case was also found to hold true:
training DL models solely on a dataset of individuals with
intellectual disabilities did not lead to good generalization performance on standard facial expression datasets. When models
trained on the MuDERI dataset were evaluated on the Google
FE-Test, the accuracy was also poor, approximately 40%. This
suggests that the facial expressions of individuals without
intellectual disabilities also exhibit unique characteristics that
are not well captured by the MuDERI dataset.
The discernible dissimilarity in facial expressions between
individuals with and without intellectual disabilities poses a
considerable challenge for the twelve tested networks, hindering their efficacy in both directions. These results underscore the imperative for a more tailored training approach,
specifically tuned for the facial expressions exhibited by
individuals with intellectual disabilities. Additionally, research
on the physiological and psychological factors that contribute

7
Fig. 7. Computed heat maps for the different trainings on FEER-DB5 tested on Google FE-Test and MuDERI, and for the training and test on MuDERI,
grouped by model (by rows), by classes (three major columns), and by training-test sets used (four sub-columns, for each expression). Warm tones like red
and orange represent the important regions, while cooler tones like green and blue represent less important ones.
to facial expressions in individuals with intellectual disabilities
can provide insights for designing more effective training
datasets and models.
B. Can deep learning models, specifically trained on a dataset
comprising individuals with intellectual disabilities, accurately
predict the facial expressions of other individuals with intellectual disabilities? (Q2)
Looking at the figures in section IV-B, it is clear that it is
not possible for any of the models to properly recognize the
facial expression of users with intellectual disabilities unseen
during the training phase, since the results in these cases are
similar to that achieved when they are trained on users without
disabilities: below 50% accuracy for almost all networks, and
below 30% F1 score in all cases. This discrepancy suggests a
divergence among users, somewhat analogous to the distinction between users from the MuDERI dataset and those from
FER-DB5, without intellectual disabilities.
However, the results also demonstrate that user-specific finetuning can significantly improve the recognition performance.
When individuals to be tested are included in the training
set, allowing the models to learn the unique facial expression
patterns of each person, the accuracy increases considerably.
This improvement is particularly evident when at least one
clip per class is present for each individual during training,
contributing to an approximate 10% increase in the F1 score.
Altogether, DL models trained solely on a dataset of individuals with intellectual disabilities struggle to generalize well to
unseen individuals within the same population. This highlights
the need for more personalized approaches, involving user-

8
specific fine-tuning, to achieve accurate FER for individuals
with intellectual disabilities. Such fine-tuning can be achieved
by incorporating additional training data from the target individuals, enabling the models to learn their unique facial
expression patterns.
C. What disparities and commonalities exist in the facial
expressions of individuals with and without intellectual disabilities, learned by DL models?(Q3)
To address this question, the third experiment employed a
XAI technique to generate heat maps highlighting the facial
regions that significantly influence the models’ predictions.
These heat maps (shown in Figure 7) were analyzed across
various model architectures, training datasets, and test datasets.
Firstly, the dependence of heat maps on the training set is
notable, overshadowing the influence of the test set, for which
the explanations were computed. This effect can be observed
on the heat maps for the Google FE-Test and MuDERI
datasets, computed for the models trained on FER-DB5, and
the logical inference is that the networks focus on the patterns
they have learned in the training phase. Nonetheless, the
disparate accuracy outcomes (approximately 90% on Google
FE-Test to less than 50% on MuDERI) imply inadequacy
of these learned patterns for facial expression recognition on
MuDERI, which comprises users with intellectual disabilities.
Secondly, heat maps exhibit variation across different networks, with more pronounced differences arising as architectures diverge. For instance, minimal disparity is observed between VGG16 and VGG19 models or among SilNet, SongNet,
and WeiNet, whereas more substantial differences emerge
between these two groups. Moreover, variability across models
is more prominent when explaining the models trained on
MuDERI, indicative of reduced consensus in finding solutions.
Lastly, attention is drawn to the first and third columns for
each class in the figure, allowing a comparison of learned
regions between the FER-DB5 and MuDERI datasets. Heat
maps computed for FER-DB5 highlight different regions of the
face, which vary depending on the model and the expression:
the mouth and nose are especially important across models
and classes, but also the chin, forehead and cheeks for some
cases, roughly aligning with human expectations. In contrast,
MuDERI’s heat maps appear more erratic, exhibiting greater
variance across models and highlighting less intuitive regions.
These less interpretable heat maps, coupled with increased
variation between models, suggest MuDERI poses a more
challenging dataset, demanding solutions that are both less
generalizable and less intuitive.
D. Limitations of the study
In this study, we trained 12 distinct neural networks for
facial expression recognition tasks on two datasets: FER-DB5,
representing individuals without intellectual disabilities, and
MuDERI, encompassing individuals with intellectual disabilities. We could not find any other public dataset including
people with intellectual disabilities, however, we acknowledge
several limitations associated with the MuDERI dataset:
• Size: While the dataset size was sufficient for training
various models, increased data volume is essential for
enhanced generalization and prediction stability.
• Class imbalance: The dataset exhibits an imbalance, with
more samples for the ”happiness” class than for others.
Although this imbalance does not severely compromise
predictions, it can impact performance, which is why
the F1 score, considering both precision and recall, was
utilized in this study to measure the models’ performance.
• Variety: All dataset images originate from recordings
of twelve participants, potentially leading to overfitting
if not carefully addressed, as observed in the second
experiment results (Section IV-B). To mitigate this, a
more extensive range of users and recordings is preferable
to diversify the dataset and reduce dependence on specific
users, scenarios, or lighting conditions.
• Quality: In some instances, the camera perspective is
suboptimal, either due to users not facing the camera or
the camera being positioned too high.
A significant challenge faced in this study lies in the scarcity
of data for the FER task concerning individuals with intellectual disabilities. Consequently, we utilized only one dataset as
a representative sample for this population, contrasting with
an ensemble of datasets for individuals without intellectual
disabilities. Future endeavors should prioritize addressing this
data scarcity by proposing new datasets that specifically include individuals with intellectual disabilities.
VI. CONCLUSION
This study explored the challenges associated with applying
automatic FER to individuals with moderate to severe intellectual disabilities. Twelve different DL models were trained,
exploring various dataset combinations and splits, including
the use of the MuDERI dataset, comprised solely of users
from this demographic. Additionally, explainability techniques
were used to provide insights into the internal mechanisms
of the models concerning users with and without intellectual
disabilities.
Results underscored the inadequacy of models trained on
generic FER datasets that exclude individuals with intellectual
disabilities. The findings emphasized the necessity for tailored training inclusive of this specific user group. Moreover,
substantial variations were observed even within this demographic, emphasizing the importance of incorporating target
users in the training set for optimal model performance. A
detailed exploration using Explainable Artificial Intelligence
(XAI) techniques uncovered significant differences in facial
regions employed by the models for expression recognition
when trained on users with and without intellectual disabilities.
The patterns identified were more intricate for the former,
featuring less intuitive regions.
The main contributions of this work are:
1) We conducted a pioneer exploration on the application of
existing automated FER systems to people with intellectual disabilities to study its direct use in systems such
as social robots. We reported the performance results,
with low values for unseen individuals with intellectual
impairments in all cases.

9
2) We provided a global explanation in the form of
heatmaps to identify the important face regions considered in decision making by the DL models. Results
show the disparities on the important face regions for
individuals with and without intellectual impairments.
3) Based on the results and the heatmaps, we concluded
that extrapolating FER systems based on DL to individuals with intellectual impairments is not feasible. Despite
training with both people with and without intellectual
impairments, the application to unseen individuals is
not effective. Therefore, user-specific training should be
done.
The results indicate that existing FER systems cannot be
directly integrated in technology such as social robots, when
used with individuals with intellectual disabilities as they may
express themselves in a unique way. This variability could
explain why the models do not generalize well across different
users and why the critical facial regions differ from one user
to another. To reassert these results, further studies with larger
datasets are needed, however, research should also focus on the
existing data scarcity for FER in individuals with intellectual
disabilities.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Grant
PID2019-104829RA-I00
funded
by
MCIN/AEI/10.13039/ 501100011033, project EXPLainable
Artificial INtelligence systems for health and well-beING
(EXPLAINING). Grant PID2022-136779OB-C32 funded by
MCIN/AEI/ 10.13039/501100011033 and by ERDF A way of
making Europe, project Playful Experiences with Interactive
Social Agents and Robots (PLEISAR): Social Learning and
Intergenerational Communication. F. Xavier Gaya-Morey
was supported by an FPU scholarship from the Ministry of
European Funds, University and Culture of the Government
of the Balearic Islands.
REFERENCES
[1] B. De Gelder and J. Van den Stock, “The bodily expressive action
stimulus
test
(beast).
construction
and
validation
of
a
stimulus
basis
for
measuring
perception
of
whole
body
expression
of
emotions,” Frontiers in Psychology, vol. 2, 2011. [Online]. Available:
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00181
[2] L. F. Barrett, R. Adolphs, S. Marsella, A. M. Martinez, and S. D. Pollak,
“Emotional expressions reconsidered: Challenges to inferring emotion
from human facial movements,” Psychological Science in the Public
Interest, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 1–68, 2019.
[3] A. Di Nuovo, G. Acampora, and M. Schlesinger, “Guest editorial cognitive agents and robots for human-centered systems,” IEEE Transactions
on Cognitive and Developmental Systems, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1–4, 2017.
[4] M. R. Lima, M. Wairagkar, M. Gupta, F. Rodriguez y Baena, P. Barnaghi, D. J. Sharp, and R. Vaidyanathan, “Conversational affective
social robots for ageing and dementia support,” IEEE Transactions on
Cognitive and Developmental Systems, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 1378–1397,
2022.
[5] B. C. Ko, “A brief review of facial emotion recognition based on visual
information,” Sensors, vol. 18, no. 2, 2018.
[6] I. Revina and W. S. Emmanuel, “A survey on human face expression
recognition techniques,” Journal of King Saud University - Computer
and Information Sciences, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 619–628, 2021.
[7] S. Li and W. Deng, “Deep facial expression recognition: A survey,”
IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 1195–
1215, 2022.
[8] P. Ekman, “An argument for basic emotions,” Cognition and Emotion,
vol. 6, no. 3-4, pp. 169–200, 1992.
[9] L. F. Barrett, R. Adolphs, S. Marsella, A. M. Martinez, and S. D. Pollak,
“Emotional Expressions Reconsidered: Challenges to Inferring Emotion
From Human Facial Movements,” Psychological Science in the Public
Interest, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 1–68, 2019.
[10] K. Grabowski, A. Rynkiewicz, A. Lassalle, S. Baron-Cohen, B. Schuller,
N. Cummins, A. Baird, J. Podg´orska-Bednarz, A. Pienia¸˙zek, and
I. Łucka, “Emotional expression in psychiatric conditions: New technology for clinicians,” Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, vol. 73,
no. 2, pp. 50–62, 2019.
[11] S. Medjden, N. Ahmed, and M. Lataifeh, “Adaptive user interface design
and analysis using emotion recognition through facial expressions and
body posture from an rgb-d sensor,” PLoS ONE, vol. 15, no. 7, p.
e0235908, 2020.
[12] S. Ramis, J. M. Buades, and F. J. Perales, “Using a social robot to
evaluate facial expressions in the wild,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 23, 2020.
[13] M. Pantic and L. J. M. Rothkrantz, “Automatic analysis of facial
expressions: the state of the art,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence, vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 1424–1445, 2000.
[14] B. Fasel and J. Luettin, “Automatic facial expression analysis: a survey,”
Pattern Recognition, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 259–275, 2003.
[15] G. Murray, K. McKenzie, A. Murray, K. Whelan, J. Cossar, K. Murray,
and J. Scotland, “The impact of contextual information on the emotion
recognition of children with an intellectual disability,” Journal of
Applied Research in Intellectual Disabilities, vol. 32, no. 1, pp.
152–158, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
abs/10.1111/jar.12517
[16] D. Adams and C. Oliver, “The expression and assessment of emotions
and internal states in individuals with severe or profound intellectual
disabilities,” Clinical Psychology Review, vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 293–
306, 2011. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0272735811000080
[17] World Health Organization (WHO), International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF), 2018.
[18] R.
H.
Zaja
and
J.
Rojahn,
“Facial
emotion
recognition
in
intellectual disabilities,” Current Opinion in Psychiatry, vol. 21,
no. 5, 2008. [Online]. Available: https://journals.lww.com/co-psychiatry/
fulltext/2008/09000/facial emotion recognition in intellectual.3.aspx
[19] T. Rayworth, “Teaching Children With Mild to Moderate Intellectual
Disabilities to Select and Produce Facial Expressions of Emotion Using
Modelling and Feedback,” Ph.D. dissertation, Edith Cowan University,
2997.
[20] F. L. Wilczenski, “Facial emotional expressions of adults with
mental retardation,” Education and Training in Mental Retardation,
vol.
26,
no.
3,
pp.
319–324,
1991.
[Online].
Available:
http:
//www.jstor.org/stable/23878619
[21] W. Mellouk and W. Handouzi, “Facial emotion recognition using deep
learning: review and insights,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 175, pp.
689–694, 2020, the 17th International Conference on Mobile Systems
and Pervasive Computing (MobiSPC),The 15th International Conference
on Future Networks and Communications (FNC),The 10th International
Conference on Sustainable Energy Information Technology.
[22] C. Campomanes- ´Alvarez and B. R. Campomanes- ´Alvarez, “Automatic
facial expression recognition for the interaction of individuals with
multiple disabilities,” in 2021 International Conference on Applied
Artificial Intelligence (ICAPAI), 2021, pp. 1–6.
[23] E. Dovgan, J. Valiˇc, G. Slapniˇcar, and M. Luˇstrek, “Recognition of
behaviour patterns for people with profound intellectual and multiple
disabilities,” in Adjunct Proceedings of the 2021 ACM International
Joint
Conference
on
Pervasive
and
Ubiquitous
Computing
and
Proceedings of the 2021 ACM International Symposium on Wearable
Computers, ser. UbiComp/ISWC ’21 Adjunct.
New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2021, p. 523–527. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3460418.3479370
[24] M. C. Smith and D. G. Dodson, “Facial expression in adults with Down’s
Syndrome.” US, pp. 602–608, 1996.
[25] N. Paredes, E. Caicedo-Bravo, and B. Bacca, “Emotion recognition in
individuals with down syndrome: A convolutional neural network-based
algorithm proposal,” Symmetry, vol. 15, no. 7, p. 1435, Jul. 2023.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/sym15071435
[26] P. Lucey, J. Cohn, T. Kanade, J. Saragih, Z. Ambadar, and I. Matthews,
“The extended cohn-kanade dataset (ck+): A complete dataset for action
unit and emotion-specified expression,” 07 2010, pp. 94–101.
[27] L. Yin, X. Wei, Y. Sun, J. Wang, and M. Rosato, “A 3d facial expression
database for facial behavior research,” vol. 2006, 05 2006, pp. 211–216.
[28] M. Lyons, M. Kamachi, and J. Gyoba, “The Japanese Female Facial
Expression (JAFFE) Dataset,” Apr. 1998, The images are provided at

10
no cost for non- commercial scientific research only. If you agree to the
conditions listed below, you may request access to download.
[29] M. Olszanowski, G. Pochwatko, K. Kuklinski, M. Scibor-Rylski,
P. Lewinski, and R. Ohme, “Warsaw set of emotional facial expression
pictures: A validation study of facial display photographs,” Frontiers in
Psychology, vol. 5, 12 2014.
[30] S. Ramis, J. M. Buades, F. J. Perales, and C. Manresa-Yee, “A novel
approach to cross dataset studies in facial expression recognition,”
Multimedia Tools Appl., vol. 81, no. 27, p. 39507–39544, nov 2022.
[31] J. Shukla, M. Barreda- ´Angeles, J. Oliver, and D. Puig, “Muderi: Multimodal database for emotion recognition among intellectually disabled
individuals,” 11 2016.
[32] J.-L. Lisani, S. Ramis, and F. J. Perales, “A contrario detection of faces:
A case example,” SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences, vol. 10, no. 4,
pp. 2091–2118, 2017.
[33] C. Sagonas, G. Tzimiropoulos, S. Zafeiriou, and M. Pantic, “300 faces
in-the-wild challenge: The first facial landmark localization challenge,”
12 2013, pp. 397–403.
[34] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, F. Pereira, C. Burges, L. Bottou, and
K. Weinberger, Eds., vol. 25.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2012.
[35] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for
large-scale image recognition,” 2015.
[36] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
recognition,” 2015.
[37] C. Szegedy, V. Vanhoucke, S. Ioffe, J. Shlens, and Z. Wojna, “Rethinking
the inception architecture for computer vision,” 2015.
[38] F. Chollet, “Xception: Deep learning with depthwise separable convolutions,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), July 2017.
[39] A. Howard, M. Sandler, G. Chu, L.-C. Chen, B. Chen, M. Tan, W. Wang,
Y. Zhu, R. Pang, V. Vasudevan, Q. V. Le, and H. Adam, “Searching for
mobilenetv3,” 2019.
[40] M. Tan and Q. V. Le, “Efficientnetv2: Smaller models and faster
training,” 2021.
[41] I. Song, H.-J. Kim, and P. B. Jeon, “Deep learning for real-time
robust facial expression recognition on a smartphone,” in 2014 IEEE
International Conference on Consumer Electronics (ICCE), 2014, pp.
564–567.
[42] W. Li, M. Li, Z. Su, and Z. Zhu, “A deep-learning approach to
facial expression recognition with candid images,” in 2015 14th IAPR
International Conference on Machine Vision Applications (MVA). IEEE,
2015, pp. 279–282.
[43] C. Manresa-Yee, S. Ramis, and J. M. Buades, “Analysis of Gender
Differences in Facial Expression Recognition Based on Deep Learning Using Explainable Artificial Intelligence,” International Journal of
Interactive Multimedia and Artificial Intelligence (In press).
[44] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “”why should i trust you?”:
Explaining the predictions of any classifier,” 2016.
[45] R. Achanta, A. Shaji, K. Smith, A. Lucchi, P. Fua, and S. S¨usstrunk,
“Slic superpixels compared to state-of-the-art superpixel methods,” IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 34,
no. 11, pp. 2274–2282, 2012.
[46] S. Ramis, C. Manresa-Yee, J. M. Buades-Rubio, and F. X. Gaya-Morey,
“Explainable facial expression recognition for people with intellectual
disabilities,” in XXIII International Conference on Human Computer Interaction (Interaccion 2023). Lleida, Spain: Association for Computing
Machinery, September 2023.
VII. BIOGRAPHY SECTION
F. Xavier Gaya-Morey F. Xavier Gaya-Morey is
a Ph. D. candidate and professor at the Universitat
de les Illes Balears. He holds a bachelor’s degree
in computer engineering and a master’s degree in
data science and computer vision. His research is
centered on the areas of explainable artificial intelligence and computer vision, with special focus on
their applications to improve the life quality of the
older adults.
Silvia Ramis Silvia Ramis, Ph. D. in Information and Communications Technologies from the
UIB (since 2019). She has participated in several
projects in the field of Computer Vision, Artificial
Intelligence, Explainable Artificial Intelligence and
Human-Robot Interaction. Her research experience
focuses on artificial intelligence applied to humanrobot interaction, especially in face detection and
facial expression recognition.
Jose M. Buades-Rubio Jose M. Buades received
his degree in Computer Science and his Ph. D. in
Computer Science from the University of Balearic
Islands. He is currently an Associate Professor at
the University of the Balearic Islands. His research
interests include computer graphics, computer vision
and artificial intelligence.
Cristina Manresa-Yee Cristina Manresa-Yee received her degree in Computer Science and her
Ph. D. in Computer Science from the University
of Balearic Islands. She is currently an Associate
Professor at the University of the Balearic Islands.
Her research interests include human-computer interacQon, computer vision and explainable AI.
