www.biosciencetrends.com
BioScience Trends Advance Publication
P1
Predictive deep learning models for cognitive risk using accessible
data
Kenji Karako*
Department of Human and Engineered Environmental Studies, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Chiba, Japan.
1. Introduction
Globally, the population is aging, with the number
of people age 65 and above reaching 727 million,
representing 9.3% of the total population of 7.7 billion
in 2020 (1). Japan has the world's highest rate of aging,
with its elderly population accounting for 28.6% of
its total population in 2020. Dementia, and especially
Alzheimer's disease, is a significant challenge in such
aging societies. The Cabinet Office predicts that by
2025, around 7 million elderly Japanese will have
dementia, accounting for 20% of those age 65 and over
(2). Globally, dementia cases are expected to rise to 152
million by 2050 (3). Early detection is crucial as many
cases progress significantly before becoming apparent,
particularly in the early stages of mild cognitive
impairment (MCI), which often goes unnoticed due
to its minimal impact on daily or social activities.
Identifying MCI early is essential to preventing and
halting the progression of dementia.

Over the past few years, various studies haves been
conducted to detect MCI early. A technology called
deep learning has been particularly highlighted and
utilized. Deep learning is one of the methods in the
field known as machine learning. Essentially, machine
learning techniques involve using an algorithm to
discover features, rules, or patterns existing in the
background of the data collected with regard to a certain
event or task, and then using those features or rules to
make inferences. Deep learning is an improved method
of machine learning based on a technique called neural
networks. A characteristic of deep learning is its ability
to learn features, rules, or patterns from a large amount
of data collected on complex problems, enabling highperformance inference. Conventional machine learning
algorithms have difficulty dealing with such a large
amount of input information, but one of the deep
learning technologies, convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) (4), can locally extract image information and
convert it into data of a smaller size. For instance, in
tasks where the goal is to discern whether an image
contains a cat or a dog, a CNN learn to recognize
essential patterns such as eyes, ears, and the mouth.
This learning process involves repeatedly extracting
relevant information, allowing the network to focus
only on the data necessary for image recognition tasks.
The CNN learns from a dataset designed for the specific
task, including images of cats and dogs alongside the
correct identification of each. Deep learning utilizes
vast amounts of task-related data and correct answers
to develop an algorithm capable of high-performance
predictions and feature extraction. Over the past decade,
DOI: 10.5582/bst.2024.01026
SUMMARY
Keywords
dementia, deep learning, mild cognitive impairment, predictive model
The early detection of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is crucial to preventing the progression of
dementia. However, it necessitates that patients voluntarily undergo cognitive function tests, which
may be too late if symptoms are only recognized once they become apparent. Recent advances in
deep learning have improved model performance, leading to applied research in various predictive
problems. Studies attempting to estimate dementia and the risk of MCI based on readily available
data are being conducted, with the hope of facilitating the early detection of MCI. The data used for
these predictions vary widely, including facial imagery, voice recordings, blood tests, and inertial
information during walking. Deep learning models that make predictions based on these data
sources have been proposed. This article summarizes recent research efforts to predict the risk of
dementia using easily accessible data. As research progresses and more accurate predictions become
feasible, simple tests could be incorporated into daily life to monitor one's personal health status and
to facilitate an early intervention.
Review

www.biosciencetrends.com
BioScience Trends Advance Publication
deep learning has advanced significantly, demonstrating
human-like or superior performance in areas such as
image recognition, text generation, autonomous driving,
facial recognition, and AI systems like ChatGPT.

Deep learning is increasingly used in medical
research, including predicting dementia. Here, studies
using deep learning from various perspectives to detect
dementia early are described. Conventionally, dementia
is assessed using the Mini-Mental State Examination
(MMSE) to evaluate cognitive function (5). In
addition, brain MRI scans and biomarker tests are used.
However, markers like amyloid-beta require invasive
procedures, making them impractical for widespread
screening and early detection of dementia (6). This
highlights the significant challenge of early detection,
as opportunities for testing are limited unless patients
proactively seek medical help. Moreover, administering
the MMSE and performing an MRI scan are costly and
time-consuming, making their use as screening tests
impractical. Therefore, recent research has focused on
developing more affordable and convenient methods of
detecting dementia using deep learning. This approach
differs from conventional testing methods by focusing
on easily obtainable information, such as facial
expressions, voice, basic blood tests, and gait data. The
potential of these data types to detect dementia early
will be detailed further. The key advantage of these
sources is their ease of acquisition. If these prediction
models evolve to offer a high level of accuracy, they
could enable immediate on-site testing, known as
point-of-care testing (PoCT), and these tests could be
incorporated into daily life. Here, the potential to use
deep learning-based methods of estimation for PoCT to
detect dementia is summarized.
2. Estimation of MCI using facial images
Research has attempted to estimate dementia based
on facial video. The field of image recognition, which
has particularly advanced as a result of deep learning,
encompasses object estimation, facial recognition,
facial expression recognition, and detecting human
figures in video. Predominantly developed through
CNNs, models like AlexNet (7), ResNet (8), and VGG
(9) have emerged to extract features from images,
alongside object detection models such as Faster
R-CNN (10) and YOLO (11) for real-time detection.
These technologies are used in studies to estimate
cognitive function based on facial videos (12). Prior
studies reported younger-looking facial impressions
in individuals without dementia (13), suggesting
potential facial indicators of cognitive decline. This
research focuses on estimating cognitive functions
based on facial videos. For the study, videos ranging
from 3 to 30 minutes in length were recorded of 34
elderly individuals age 65 and above, including 10
with MCI. Images were extracted from these videos at
a rate of 5 frames per second, with 10 frames over 2
seconds forming one set for the model's input. A total
of 3,822 data sets were created, with 3,058 sets used for
training and 764 sets for evaluation, to solve a binary
classification problem of distinguishing between MCI
and health using deep learning. The study used ResNet,
which is based on a CNN, to extract facial structure
and motion information from facial videos (Figure 1).
ResNet, a deep learning model linking over 50 layers
of CNNs, was developed for image recognition tasks
and is highly effective at extracting features from twodimensional spatial information. The model to estimate
MCI was created using two instances of ResNet: one
as a model to extract spatial features from the face
to estimate MCI and the other as a model to extract
dynamic features based on facial dynamics to predict
MCI. The spatial model randomly selects one image
from a set of 10 frames over 2 seconds for input,
focusing on static facial features. The dynamic model
generates an optical flow from the same frame set,
reflecting facial movements over 2 seconds, which
ResNet then uses to extract features. Optical flow (14),
represented by a three-dimensional vector for each
P2
Figure 1. Deep learning structure to estimate MCI based on image and motion information. Facial videos are divided into still images and
motion information using an optical flow. Deep learning models are created for each to extract spatial and dynamic features, which are then used to
estimate MCI.

www.biosciencetrends.com
BioScience Trends Advance Publication
P3
text. This approach estimates Alzheimer's based on the
coherence and expressiveness of the text. A drawback
is that features unique to speech might be missed.
However, unlike with direct extraction of speech
features, this approach allows for estimation based on
lengthy dialogues that have been converted to text.
Recent advances in deep learning for natural language
processing, such as the use of the high-performance
natural language model BERT (23), have led to
proposed methods of estimating Alzheimer's using
those technologies (24).

Data used to train and evaluate models come from
tasks performed during studies. Primarily, tasks include
semantic verbal fluency (25), where subjects list as
many items as possible from a category like animals or
vegetables within one minute (26,27), a natural speech
task involving conversation without direct questions
(28), and a picture description task where participants
orally describe the content of a picture within a set
time (29). Notably, the ADRess database (30) offers
open access to data from these tasks, including voice
recordings, transcribed texts, and MMSE scores. Such
databases are valuable for developing deep learning
models to estimate Alzheimer's based on speech data.
4. Estimation of MCI using blood test information
One unique area of research to detect dementia early
using deep learning involves blood test information
(31). This research focuses on the relationship between
systemic disorders like arteriosclerosis, which is the
result of lifestyle diseases, and cognitive impairments,
which include both MCI and severe dementia (32-34). It
also considers other systemic disorders that might affect
cognitive function, such as malnutrition (35), anemia
(36), lipid metabolism (37), purine metabolism (38),
and renal dysfunction (39). These can be detected via
basic blood tests obtained during health check-ups. The
research attempts to estimate MCI using blood test data,
including 23 items like red and white blood cell counts,
hemoglobin levels, hematocrit, albumin levels, and age,
using a feedforward neural network, a basic form of
deep learning, to predict MMSE scores. The input items
obtained from the blood tests used are shown in Table
1. This neural network consists of a four-layer structure
with intermediate layers as shown in Figure 2. Each
intermediate layer has a neural network with 400 nodes,
solving a regression problem that estimates the MMSE
in the range of 0 to 30 based on 24 numerical items.
Data used to train and evaluate the data were collected
from 202 patients (average age: 73.48 ± 13.1 years).
All patients received inpatient treatment including
rehabilitation and pharmacotherapy for lifestyle-related
diseases, with 142 patients having cerebrovascular
diseases and 174 patients having at least one lifestylerelated disease. The feedforward neural network was
trained and evaluated using the leave-one-out method,
pixel, is analogous to the RGB structure of images,
making ResNet suitable for extracting features from
these data. The model ultimately estimates whether
an individual has MCI based on two dynamically and
spatially obtained features. The final model had a
precision of 0.94, recall of 0.78, accuracy of 0.91, and
an F1 score of 0.85. Despite the low recall and concerns
over data on a small number of individuals and the
balance between MCI and normal data, the ability to
determine MCI at a certain level using deep learning
represents a significant advance in early detection.
Estimation of cognitive functions based on video data,
such as this, is also being performed in another study
(15) and is an area of growing interest. If MCI can be
estimated based on approximately two seconds of video
data, this could allow for testing without a significant
burden in everyday life or visits to hospitals and care
facilities, enabling immediate examinations on-site.
3. Estimating Alzheimer's disease using speech
information
Estimating dementia based on speech information is
one of the most extensively studied tasks in the field
of deep learning-based estimation of dementia (16).
Alzheimer's disease, a type of dementia, initially
manifests as language impairments. Focusing on this
characteristic, the goal is to estimate the presence of
Alzheimer's disease using speech data. Previous studies
have reported that Alzheimer's patients tend to pause
more frequently between words and speak more slowly
than healthy individuals (17). Moreover, Alzheimer's
patients are reported to have difficulties in finding
appropriate words or expressions to match a sentence
(18,19). Deep learning models are used to extract
various vocal features from speech data. In order to
estimate Alzheimer's disease, two primary features are
extracted: features from continuous speech signals and
features from speech converted to text to analyze the
context and content of conversations. These features are
then used for the final estimation task.

In order to extract features from speech signals,
studies have used deep learning algorithms that are
effective at continuous signal processing (20), such
as long short-term memory (21) and recurrent neural
networks (RNN) (22). These algorithms have the
capability to internally retain a memory of past inputs,
allowing the neural network to maintain information
over a certain duration. This capacity enables the
extraction of features needed to estimate Alzheimer's
disease not just based on a single speech sample but
also based on historical data. However, they have
limitations in terms of storing information over
extended periods, such as tens of minutes.

The second method involves converting speech into
textual data and then extracting Alzheimer's disease
characteristics from the context and content of the

www.biosciencetrends.com
BioScience Trends Advance Publication
P4
which was applied to the blood test results and MMSE
scores from the 202 patients. Actual MMSE scores
and predicted MMSE scores were correlated (r = 0.85,
p < 0.001). The mean absolute error was 2.02. Blood
tests, primarily obtained during medical examinations
and health check-ups, serve as the main data for
this research. A cognitive function estimation model
based on blood tests could effectively be utilized as
a test to screen for dementia in medical facilities and
during regular health check-ups. For instance, when
elderly individuals undergo blood tests during a health
examination or medical visit, their cognitive function
can be estimated using deep learning in no time at all.
If MCI or dementia is suspected, a medical facility
could then encourage the individual to undergo a more
detailed examination or visit an outpatient clinic. This
estimation model could be an effective means for early
detection of dementia, simply by undergoing a regular
medical consultation or health check-up.
5. Estimation of MCI using inertial information
during walking
Compared to the previously described models to
estimate MCI, there is another approach that is more
similar to everyday life, and it has the potential to
be used for the early detection of MCI by estimating
cognitive decline on the spot in everyday situations.
Studies have estimated MCI using inertial sensor data
collected by a wearable device when the wearer walks
(40,41). In those studies, a small inertial sensor was
affixed to the shin of 30 cognitively normal individuals
and 30 individuals with MCI, and they were asked to
perform a simple task of walking 20 meters, as well as a
complex task of walking 20 meters while simultaneously
performing cognitive tasks such as subtracting numbers
or naming animals. Moreover, subjects were asked
to always keep walking while performing the task.
The device used for measurement was the Shimmer3
GSR+ Unit (42), which is equipped with a 3-axis
accelerometer and a 3-axis gyroscope. Eight pieces
of information, including three forms of acceleration,
three angular velocities, and the total magnitude of the
signal vectors of both the accelerometer and gyroscope
sensors, were used to estimate MCI. A six-layer CNN
and three types of RNN were used to estimate MCI,
as shown in Figure 3. The eight signals input are timeseries data, and the 8×T input information, segmented
Figure 2. Structure of deep learning used to estimate the MMSE score based on blood test data. It consists of a forward propagation neural
network with a four-layer structure.
Table 1. Test items used to estimate the MMSE score based
on blood test data
Blood test items
White blood cell count
Red blood cell count
Mean corpuscular volume
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration
Platelet count
Hematocrit
Hemoglobin
Total protein
Albumin
A/G ratio
AST (GOT)
ALT (GPT)
γ-GTP
Total cholesterol
Triglyceride
Blood urea nitrogen
Creatinine
Uric Acid
Glucose
Na
K
CI

www.biosciencetrends.com
BioScience Trends Advance Publication
P5
by a certain time T, is input into the CNN as an image.
The features extracted by this process are then input
into the RNN. Since the RNN has the characteristic of
retaining past input information, the features extracted
by the CNN from information before the most recent
time T are retained, and features that incorporate timeseries information are ultimately extracted. Finally,
a binary classification of MCI is performed by a
feedforward neural network. The leave-one-out method
was used for model training and evaluation, achieving
an accuracy of 73.33%, a sensitivity of 83.33%, and
a specificity of 63.3%. The walking information used
in this study was obtained by attaching a measuring
device to the shin, which differs from walking data that
can be easily obtained with commonly carried devices
such as smartphones or smartwatches. Therefore, this
method has not yet reached the point where it can
be used for early detection in everyday life as it is.
However, as research and data collection progress, this
method could be effectively utilized as a method of
detecting MCI early since it the sensor is easy to attach
and measurement is performed simply by walking,
potentially serving as a prompt before visiting a medical
facility.
6. Conclusion
PoCT refers to methods that allow for immediate
testing on the spot at the appropriate time. Conventional
tests for dementia primarily involve brain imaging with
MRI, peripheral biomarkers like amyloid-beta, and
the MMSE, which are used for final diagnosis. These
tests require a certain amount of time to conduct, and
moreover, they are opportunities that will not arise
unless individuals are aware of their symptoms and go
to a hospital voluntarily. Due to the inconvenience of
such tests, research has been conducted on methods
that can estimate MCI using deep learning based on
information that can be acquired more easily, without
hassle, and without posing a burden. Deep learning
has a high level of inferential performance and can
learn from complex data, so data measured during
events that indirectly reflect the impact of dementia
could be used effectively, something that was difficult
to achieve in the past. If high-precision estimation of
MCI becomes possible based on information that can
be obtained relatively easily, such as speech, facial
expressions, blood, and gait, deep learning models
will likely be incorporated into testing systems for
PoCT. For example, estimation of MCI using facial
recognition or blood tests could be combined with
regular health checkups for the elderly, allowing for
effortless estimation of MCI. Moreover, if estimation
of MCI can be achieved using diverse data sources, this
could lead to more accurate estimates. Furthermore, if
estimation of MCI is widely adopted for PoCT, it could
easily be configured into a smartphone or web app.
Estimation could be performed at medical facilities
and also in nursing homes and at home, so this test
could be integrated into one's daily life. Including
simple tests using deep learning in daily life could
allow for immediate detection of abnormalities, leading
to the discovery of cognitive decline at an earlier
stage compared to conventional methods. If tests are
conducted daily and the data collected and used for
research, this could lead to estimates of future changes
in cognitive functions, such as one year or five years
later, based on an analysis of daily data collected over
time.
Funding: None.
Conflict of Interest: The author has no conflicts of
interest to disclose.
References
1.
Cabinet Office, 2022 Edition of the White Paper on an
Aging Society: Chapter 1 The State of Aging (Section
1, 2) https://www8.cao.go.jp/kourei/whitepaper/w-2022/
html/zenbun/s1_1_2.html (accessed February 10, 2024)
(in Japanese)
2.
Cabinet Office, 2022 Edition of the White Paper on an
Aging Society: Chapter 1 The State of Aging (Section
1, 1) https://www8.cao.go.jp/kourei/whitepaper/w-2022/
html/zenbun/s1_1_1.html (accessed February 10, 2024)
(in Japanese)
Figure 3. The structure of deep learning to estimate MCI based on inertial information during walking. The CNN handles inertial information
in image format and extracts features. The recurrent neural network subsequently extracts features based on those from the past and present, and these
are used these to perform the final estimation of MCI.

www.biosciencetrends.com
BioScience Trends Advance Publication
P6
3.
World Health Organization, Dementia: A public health
priority. World Health Organization https://www.who.
int/publications/i/item/dementia-a-public-health-priority
(accessed February 10, 2024)
4.
LeCun Y, Boser B, Denker JS, Henderson D, Howard
RE, Hubbard W, Jackel LD. Backpropagation applied to
handwritten zip code recognition. Neural Comput. 1989; 1:
541-551.
5.
Folstein MF, Folstein SE, McHugh PR. "Mini-mental
state" A practical method for grading the cognitive state of
patients for clinicians. J Psychiatr Res. 1975; 12: 189-98.
6.
Dumurgier J, Hanseeuw BJ, Hatling FB, Judge KA,
Schultz AP, Chhatwal JP, Blacker D, Sperling RA,
Johnson KA, Hyman BT, Gómez-Isla T. Alzheimer's
disease biomarkers and future decline in cognitive normal
older adults. J. Alzheimer's Dis. 2017; 60:1451-1459.
7.
Krizhevsky A, Sutskever I, Hinton GE. ImageNet
classification with deep convolutional neural networks.
Commun. ACM. 2017; 60:84-90.
8.
He K, Zhang X, Ren S, Sun J. Deep residual learning
for image recognition. Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. 2016:770-778.
9.
Simonyan K, Zisserman A. Very deep convolutional
networks for large-scale image recognition. 2014; https://
doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1409.1556
10.	 Ren S, He K, Girshick R, Sun J. Faster R-CNN: Towards
real-time object detection with region proposal networks.
2015; https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1506.01497
11.	 Redmon J, Divvala S, Girshick R, Farhadi A. You only
look once: Unified, real-time object detection. Proc.
IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
2016:779-788.
12.	 Lee C, Chau H, Wang H, Chuang Y, Chau Y. Detection
of mild cognitive impairment by facial videos. IEEE Int.
Conf. Consum. Electron.-Taiwan. 2022:197-198.
13.	 Tufekcioglu Z, Bilgic B, Zeylan AE, Salah AA,
Dibeklioglu H, Emre M. Do Alzheimer's disease patients
appear younger than their real age? Dement Geriatr Cogn
Disord. 2020; 49:483-488.
14.	 Lai WS, Huang JB, Yang MH. Semi-supervised learning
for optical flow with generative adversarial networks.
Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 2017; 30.
15.	 Sun J, Dodge HH, Mahoor MH. MC-ViViT: Multi-branch
classifier-ViViT to detect mild cognitive impairment
in older adults using facial videos. 2023; https://doi.
org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.05292
16.	 Yang Q, Li X, Ding X, Xu F, Ling Z. Deep learningbased speech analysis for Alzheimer's disease detection: A
literature review. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2022; 14:186-186.
17.	 Croisile B, Brabant M, Carmoi T, Lepage Y, Aimard G,
Trillet M. Comparison between oral and written spelling
in Alzheimer's disease. Brain Lang. 1996; 54:361-387.
18.	 Croisile B, Ska B, Brabant M, Duchene A, Lepage Y,
Aimard G, Trillet M. Comparative study of oral and
written picture description in patients with Alzheimer's
disease. Brain Lang. 1996; 53:1-19.
19.	 Cuetos F, Arango-Lasprilla JC, Uribe C, Valencia C,
Lopera F. Linguistic changes in verbal expression:
A preclinical marker of Alzheimer's disease. J Int
Neuropsychol Soc. 2007; 13:433-439.
20.	 Rohanian M, Hough J, Purver M. Alzheimer's dementia
recognition using acoustic, lexical, disfluency and speech
pause features robust to noisy inputs. 2021; https://doi.
org/10.48550/arXiv.2106.15684
21.	 Hochreiter S, Schmidhuber J. Long short-term memory.
Neural Comput. 1997; 9:1735-1780.
22.	 Medsker L, Jain LC. Recurrent neural networks: Design
and applications. CRC press. 1999.
23.	 Devlin J, Chang MW, Lee K, Toutanova K. Bert:
Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for
language understanding. 2018; https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.1810.04805
24.	 Liu Z, Proctor L, Collier PN, Zhao X. Automatic
diagnosis and prediction of cognitive decline associated
with Alzheimer's dementia through spontaneous speech.
IEEE Int. Conf. Signal Image Processing Appl. 2021:39-
43.
25.	 Lopes M, Brucki SMD, Giampaoli V, Mansur LL.
Semantic verbal fluency test in dementia: Preliminary
retrospective analysis. Dement Neuropsychol. 2009;
3:315-20.
26.	 Campagna F, Montagnese S, Ridola L, Senzolo M, Schiff
S, De Rui M, et al. The animal naming test: An easy tool
for the assessment of hepatic encephalopathy. Hepatology.
2017; 66:198-208.
27.	 Chien YW, Hong SY, Cheah WT, Fu LC, Chang YL.
An assessment system for Alzheimer's disease based
on speech using a novel feature sequence design and
recurrent neural network. IEEE Int. Conf. Syst. Man
Cybern. 2018; 3289-3294.
28.	 Illes J. Neurolinguistic features of spontaneous language
production dissociate three forms of neurodegenerative
disease: Alzheimer's, Huntington's, and Parkinson's. Brain
Lang. 1989; 37:628-642.
29.	 Becker JT, Boller F, Lopez OL, Saxton J, McGonigle KL.
The natural history of Alzheimer's disease: Description
of study cohort and accuracy of diagnosis. Arch. Neurol.
1994; 51:585-594.
30.	 Luz S, Haider F, de la Fuente S, Fromm D, MacWhinney
B. Alzheimer's dementia recognition through spontaneous
speech: The ADReSS challenge. 2020; https://doi.
org/10.48550/arXiv.2004.06833
31.	 Sakatani K, Oyama K, Hu L. Deep learning-based
screening test for cognitive impairment using basic blood
test data for health examination. Front. Neurol. 2020;
11:588140.
32.	 Van Der Flier WM, Skoog I, Schneider JA, Pantoni
L, Mok V, Chen CL, Scheltens P. Vascular cognitive
impairment. Nat. Rev. Dis. Primers. 2018; 4:1-16.
33.	 Al-Qazzaz NK, Ali SH, Ahmad SA, Islam S, Mohamad
K. Cognitive impairment and memory dysfunction after
a stroke diagnosis: A post-stroke memory assessment.
Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2014; 1677-1691.
34.	 Gorelick PB, Scuteri A, Black SE, et al. Vascular
contributions to cognitive impairment and dementia: A
statement for healthcare professionals from the American
Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke.
2011; 42:2672-2713.
35.	 Brooke J, Ojo O Enteral nutrition in dementia: A
systematic review. Nutrients. 2015; 7:2456-2468.
36.	 Hong CH, Falvey C, Harris TB, Simonsick EM, Satterfield
S, Ferrucci L, Metti AL, Patel KV, Yaffe K. Anemia and
risk of dementia in older adults: Findings from the Health
ABC study. Neurology. 2013; 81:528-533.
37.	 Qizilbash N, Gregson J, Johnson ME, Pearce N, Douglas
I, Wing K, Evans SJW, Pocock SJ. BMI and risk of
dementia in two million people over two decades: A
retrospective cohort study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol.
2015; 3:431-436.
38.	 Delgado-Alvarado M, Gago B, Navalpotro-Gomez I,

www.biosciencetrends.com
BioScience Trends Advance Publication
P7
Jiménez-Urbieta H, Rodriguez-Oroz MC. Biomarkers for
dementia and mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson's
disease. Mov. Disord. 2016; 31:861-881.
39.	 Miranda AS, Cordeiro TM, dos Santos Lacerda Soares
TM, Ferreira RN, Simoes e Silva AC. Kidney–brain axis
inflammatory cross-talk: from bench to bedside. Clin. Sci.
2017; 131:1093-1105.
40.	 Lee H, Shahzad A, Kim K. Automated prescreening of
MCI through deep learning models based on wearable
inertial sensors data. Alzheimers. Dement. 2021; 17:
e052744.
41.	 Shahzad A, Dadlani A, Lee H, Kim K. Automated
prescreening of mild cognitive impairment using shankmounted inertial sensors based gait biomarkers. IEEE
Access. 2022; 10:15835-15844.
42.	 Burns A, Greene BR, McGrath MJ, O'Shea TJ, Kuris B,
Ayer SM, Stroiescu F, Cionca V. SHIMMER™ A wireless
sensor platform for noninvasive biomedical research.
IEEE Sens. J. 2010; 10:1527-1534.
Received January 12, 2024; Revised February 10, 2024;
Accepted February 16, 2024.
*Address correspondence to:
Kenji Karako, Department of Human and Engineered
Environmental Studies, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences,
The University of Tokyo, 5-1-5 Kashiwanoha, City of Kashiwa,
Chiba 227-8568, Japan.
E-mail: tri.leafs@gmail.com
Released online in J-STAGE as advance publication February
20, 2024.
