University of Southern Denmark
Emotion recognition and Artificial Intelligence
A Systematic Review (2014-2023) and Research Recommendations
Khare, Smith; Blanes-Vidal, Victoria; Nadimi, Esmaeil; Acharya, U Rajendra
Published in:
Information Fusion
DOI:
10.1016/j.inffus.2023.102019
Publication date:
2024
Document version:
Final published version
Document license:
CC BY-NC-ND
Citation for pulished version (APA):
Khare, S., Blanes-Vidal, V., Nadimi, E., & Acharya, U. R. (2024). Emotion recognition and Artificial Intelligence:
A Systematic Review (2014-2023) and Research Recommendations . Information Fusion, 102, Article 102019.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2023.102019
Go to publication entry in University of Southern Denmark's Research Portal
Terms of use
This work is brought to you by the University of Southern Denmark.
Unless otherwise specified it has been shared according to the terms for self-archiving.
If no other license is stated, these terms apply:
            • You may download this work for personal use only.
            • You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
            • You may freely distribute the URL identifying this open access version
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details and we will investigate your claim.
Please direct all enquiries to puresupport@bib.sdu.dk
Download date: 29. Apr. 2026

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 

$YDLODEOH RQOLQH  6HSWHPEHU 
  7KH $XWKRU
V
 3XEOLVKHG E\ (OVHYLHU %9 7KLV LV DQ RSHQ DFFHVV DUWLFOH XQGHU WKH && %<1&1' OLFHQVH
KWWS
FUHDWLYHFRPPRQVRUJOLFHQVHVE\
QFQG

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Information Fusion
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/inffus
Emotion recognition and artificial intelligence: A systematic review
(2014–2023) and research recommendations
Smith K. Khare a,∗, Victoria Blanes-Vidal a, Esmaeil S. Nadimi a, U. Rajendra Acharya b
a Applied AI and Data Science Unit, Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller Institute, Faculty of Engineering, University of Southern Denmark, Denmark
b School of Mathematics, Physics and Computing, University of Southern Queensland, Springfield, Australia
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Keywords:
Emotion recognition
Speech
Facial images
Electroencephalogram
Electrocardiogram
Eye tracking
Galvanic skin response
Artificial intelligence
Machine learning
Deep learning
A B S T R A C T
Emotion recognition is the ability to precisely infer human emotions from numerous sources and modalities
using questionnaires, physical signals, and physiological signals. Recently, emotion recognition has gained
attention because of its diverse application areas, like affective computing, healthcare, human–robot interactions, and market research. This paper provides a comprehensive and systematic review of emotion
recognition techniques of the current decade. The paper includes emotion recognition using physical and
physiological signals. Physical signals involve speech and facial expression, while physiological signals include
electroencephalogram, electrocardiogram, galvanic skin response, and eye tracking. The paper provides an
introduction to various emotion models, stimuli used for emotion elicitation, and the background of existing
automated emotion recognition systems. This paper covers comprehensive searching and scanning of wellknown datasets followed by design criteria for review. After a thorough analysis and discussion, we selected
142 journal articles using PRISMA guidelines. The review provides a detailed analysis of existing studies
and available datasets of emotion recognition. Our review analysis also presented potential challenges in the
existing literature and directions for future research.
1. Introduction
Emotion is a dynamic cognitive and physiological condition that develops in reaction to inputs, like experiences, thoughts, or interactions
with people. It includes subjective experience, cognitive processes,
behavioral influences, physiological responses, and communication.
Therefore, emotion recognition is crucial in the application areas such
as marketing, human–robot interaction, healthcare, mental health monitoring, and security [1]. The study of emotions for healthcare includes
vast neurological disorders like sleep disorders [2], schizophrenia [3],
evaluation of sleep quality [4], and Parkinson’s disease [5]. Human
emotions can play a key role in detecting physiological conditions like
fatigue [6], drowsiness [7], depression [3], and pain [8]. The experts
also suggested that variation in emotions are of great importance in
the study of autism spectral disorder [9], attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder [10], and panic disorder [11]. The study of human emotion is
also crucial for human–robot interaction and brain-computer evaluation, where machines are designed to behave like humans for various
applications [1]. Therefore, a detailed study of human emotions and
automated human emotion recognition is crucial.
∗Corresponding author.
E-mail address: smkh@mmmi.sdu.dk (S.K. Khare).
1.1. Paradigms of emotion
Distinct brain parts induce different emotions [12]. There are three
types of emotional responses: reactional, hormonal, and automatic
[13]. According to psychology, emotions are responses to stimuli,
associated with qualitative physiological changes [13]. Two basic approaches used to study the nature of emotions are discrete method and
the multidimensional approach [13].
1.1.1. Discrete emotions theory
According to this theory, emotions are different and discrete categories, each with its ensemble of cognitive, psychological, and behavioral factors. Emotions can be positive or negative. According to
proponents of this hypothesis, there exist a few fundamental emotions that are generally recognized across cultures. There are six basic
emotions namely: happiness, sadness, anger, surprise, fear, and disgust [14]. Robert Plutchik provided a comprehensive emotional model
called Plutchik’s wheel of emotions [15]. Plutchik’s wheel consists
of eight emotions namely: fear, joy, sadness, trust, anger, surprise,
anticipation, and disgust. Other associated emotions, which combines
these eight primary emotions are derived by positional intensities. The
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2023.102019
Received 25 August 2023; Received in revised form 8 September 2023; Accepted 10 September 2023

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
Fig. 1. Plutchik’s wheel of emotions [15].
Fig. 2. 2D VA emotion model.
intensity of the emotions increases as we move towards the center of
the wheel and vice-versa. Fig. 1 provides an overview of Plutchik’s
wheel of emotions [15].
1.1.2. Multidimensional emotions theory
The multidimensional approach for emotions acknowledges that
emotions are complicated and impacted by numerous elements such as
personal experiences, cultural background, and individual variations.
It gives a framework for comprehending the richness and complexity
of emotional experiences and allows for a more in-depth examination
of emotional states. It is categorized as a 2-dimensional (2D) and 3dimensional (3D) emotional space model. In the 2D emotional space
model, emotions are divided into valence (V), which can be positive
(Pos) or negative (Neg) and arousal (A), i.e., high activation or low
activation. Russell’s 2D emotional space model that maps using valence
and arousal is shown in Fig. 2 [16].
Similarly, the 3D emotional space model maps various continuous
dimensions, such as V (Pos or Neg), arousal (high or low activation),
and dominance (D) (feeling in control or feeling controlled). The 3D
emotional space model proposed by Mehrabian and Russell is shown
in Fig. 3 [17].
Fig. 3. 3D VAD emotion model.
2. Emotion sensing modalities
Emotion sensing is a technique used to extract human emotions.
Over the years, various methods have been adopted to study human
emotions. These techniques are broadly classified into three categories,
namely: questionnaires, physical, and physiological, as shown in Fig. 4.
2.1. Questionnaires
The questionnaire and self-reports are intended to begin people
thinking about the various emotional intelligence competencies as they
pertain to them. Various techniques have been developed based on
manual assessment of emotions, including positive and negative affect
schedule (PANAS) [18], self-assessment manikin (SAM) [19], photographic affect meter (PAM) [20], and experience sampling method
(ESM) [21]. PANAS is a psychological technique for assessing and
measuring a person’s positive and negative emotions. The PANAS questionnaire is divided into two sections: the positive affect scale and
the negative affect scale [18]. SAM is a nonverbal pictorial evaluation
approach that directly evaluates the valence, arousal, and dominance
associated with an individual’s emotive reaction to a wide range of
stimuli [19]. PAM is a novel affect measurement technique in which
users select the photo that best matches their present mood from a large
selection [20]. ESM is a research technique used in psychology and
related fields to collect real-time data on individuals’ experiences, behaviors, and psychological states in their natural environments. It aims
to capture momentary or near-real-time assessments of participants’
experiences and contexts [21].
2.2. Physical signals
Physical signals for emotion recognition include facial expressions,
speech, text, gestures, and body postures [22]. Speech and facial expressions are the most commonly employed mechanisms for emotion
identification among physical signals [22]. As a result, we chose to limit
our review study to only physical activities based on speech and facial
expressions.
2.3. Physiological signals
Physiological signals are the most widely used source for emotion
identification. The advantage of physiological signals is that they are
activated unintentionally, so cannot be controlled easily by the subject.
Other benefits include efficient and low-cost data collection, fewer

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
Fig. 4. Branching representation and classification of emotion sensing techniques.
errors caused by light and shadow acquisition, and less invasion of
user privacy [22–24]. Electroencephalogram (EEG), electrocardiogram
(ECG), electromyogram (EMG), galvanic skin response (GSR), respiration (RSP), skin temperature, photoplethysmography, and eye tracking
(ET) are the most commonly employed physiological signals for emotion recognition [22]. Among physiological signals, the most often
utilized modalities for detecting human emotions are EEG, GSR, ECG,
and ET. As a result, these four physiological modalities were included
in our review analysis.
3. Overview of automated emotion recognition systems
Automated emotion recognition systems involve several steps for
predicting accurate emotional states. The schematic view of the steps
in an automated emotion recognition system is shown in Fig. 5. The
brief discussion about each step is discussed as follows:
3.1. Source
This first step refers to the part of the body, used for measuring
the responses to various inputs. Since our review covers two physical
signals (speech and facial expressions) and four physiological signals
(EEG, ECG, GSR, and ET), therefore, acquisition sources are limited to
eyes, speech, brain, heart, skin, and face.
3.2. Stimuli
Stimuli are any items, events, or conditions that cause an organism, such as a person or an animal, to respond or react. Stimuli are
commonly employed in psychology and research to elicit responses or
behaviors for studying and understanding various psychological processes. Stimuli can include situations, scenarios, or social interactions
that elicit emotional, cognitive, or behavioral responses. Well-known
stimuli for eliciting the targeted emotions are virtual reality (VR),
images, video games, music, audio/video clips, audio, and/or videos
[25–27]. Based on the type of stimulus various emotions are elicited
and are ranked manually using a questionnaire using SAM, PANAS,
PAM, ESM, or other similar techniques.
3.3. Input signals
Input signals are pre-processed for effective analysis. Pre-processing
refers to the steps or procedures performed on raw data prior to analysis
or further processing. Pre-processing is critical in data analysis because
it improves data quality, reduces noise or extraneous information, and
prepares the data for effective analysis and modeling. The specific
pre-processing steps are decided by the nature of the data and the
goals of the study. Typically, the steps involved in pre-processing
are data cleaning (removal of artifacts and other noise sources), data
integration, data transformation, data sampling, and data scaling.
3.4. Feature extraction
In data analysis and machine learning (ML), feature extraction
refers to translating raw data into a set of relevant and representative characteristics that may be used for further modeling. It seeks
to extract from data important information or patterns that encapsulate the key traits or properties of the underlying phenomenon.
The goal of feature extraction is to find and choose a subset of attributes that best capture the subtle details in the data while rejecting
redundant or unnecessary data. This procedure reduces the data’s
dimensionality, making it more understandable and suited for analysis
or modeling activities. The most common features include statistical features, nonlinear features, frequency-domain features, entropy
features, time–frequency-based features, image-vision-based features,
fractal dimensions, nonlinear decomposition, domain-specific features,
and deep learning (DL) features.
3.5. Feature selection
The process of choosing a subset of pertinent characteristics from a
set of features that are present in a dataset is known as feature selection.
It attempts to choose the most discriminative and informative features
that contribute the most to the analysis or prediction while avoiding
duplicate or unnecessary features. The choice of features is crucial since
it may speed up computation, reduce overfitting, boost interpretability,
and enhance model performance. The most common feature selection techniques include dimensionality reduction (principle component
analysis or independent component analysis), statistical or univariate analysis (chi-squared test, ANOVA, or correlation), regularization
techniques (Lasso (L1 regularization) and Ridge (L2 regularization)),
feature selection algorithms or wrapper methods (recursive feature
elimination, sequential feature selection, and tree-based methods, or
ensemble based methods).
3.6. Classification
It is a crucial step in an automated detection system that is used
to categorize the values of the variables to its subsequent classes. It
involves decision-making using ML or DL techniques. ML techniques
involve, among others, support vector machine (SVM), k-nearest neighbor (KNN), decision tree (DT), artificial neural network (ANN), random
forest (RF), logistic regression, linear discriminant analysis are some
of the most widely used techniques. Convolutional neural network
(CNN), long-short term memory (LSTM) networks, deep neural networks (DNN), multilayer perceptron (MLP), recurrent neural network

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
Fig. 5. Schematic diagram of steps involved in an automated emotion recognition system.
(RNN), generative adversarial networks (GAN), gated recurrent units,
self-organizing maps, deep reinforcement learning, deep transfer learning, autoencoders (AE), transformers, and deep belief network (DBN)
are some of the state-of-the-art DL models.
3.7. Model evaluation
An ML or classification model’s quality and efficacy are assessed
using performance measures. These metrics give numerical evaluations
of the model’s performance regarding predictions and generalizability
to new data. Particular challenge, kind of data, and the required
assessment standards influence the choice of performance indicators.
Some famous indicators of success for ML/DL models are accuracy
(ACC), recall, specificity, precision, confusion matrix, area under the
receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC-ROC), and F-1 score.
4. Motivation and highlights of the review study
In the last decade, several review papers have been published for
emotion recognition and decision-making. We have performed a comprehensive search by scanning the relevant review articles published
recently, and identified significant limitations, before designing our
systematic review as shown in Fig. 6.
4.1. Existing emotion recognition review studies
Hasnul et al. [28] presented a review of ECG-based emotion recognition and their applications. Their review strategy did not employ
PRISMA guidelines and was limited to ECG signals. The authors further discuss the application areas confined to healthcare with limited
discussion on challenges and future directions. Bota et al. [29] carried
out a comprehensive review on emotion recognition using physiological signals and ML techniques. Their review study failed to employ
a systematic review strategy using PRISMA guidelines. Their review
study did not discuss application areas, presented limited discussion,
and limited future directions. Singh and Goel [30] presented a systematic review of emotion recognition using speech signals following
PRISMA guidelines. Their method covered the application of ML and DL
techniques, but failed to cover research challenges and comprehensive
research directions. Kamble and Sengupta [31] presented a review
on emotion recognition using EEG signals without following PRISMA
guidelines. They presented a detailed analysis of feature extraction
methods and decision-making using ML and DL techniques. Their review method did not explore research challenges and future directions.
Zhang et al. [32] presented a review of EEG signals and ML techniques
for emotion recognition without PRISMA guidelines. The authors presented a comprehensive study on existing methods, open challenges,
and future directions. Adyapady and Annappa [33] provided a comprehensive review of facial image-based emotion recognition using
ML and DL techniques. Their emotion detection review method does
not involve PRISMA guidelines. The authors discussed various techniques, datasets, and a few applications of emotion recognition. Ba and
Hu [34] performed a systematic review following PRISMA guidelines
on emotion recognition using wearables in education. Their review
study showed that portable and accurate wearable devices adopting
electro-dermal activity and heart rate signals are common for emotion
detection in education.
4.2. Motivation for the current review study
Human emotions are important markers for different states of conditions and behavioral analysis. Recently, several review studies have
been conducted, focusing on numerous applications and detection techniques. After doing a comprehensive literature analysis on human
emotion recognition review articles, the following gaps have been
identified.
• Many emotion recognition studies have been performed without
PRISMA guidelines [28,29,31–33].
• The majority of the review articles previously published for emotion recognition focused on a single modality i.e., either physiological signal, speech, or facial images [28,31–33].
• The emotion recognition studies on physiological signals are confined to EEG signals or ML techniques [31,32].

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
Fig. 6. Comparison and uniqueness of our review study with existing review papers published for emotion recognition.
• A little discussion on research challenges and applications
[28–33].
• Limited directions for future research [28–33].
The above-listed gaps motivate us to write a comprehensive and systematic review of emotion recognition using different modalities. We
have also focused on a detailed discussion of datasets, feature extraction
techniques, and inclusion of artificial intelligence (AI). Our review
study presents a detailed analysis and comprehensive summary of existing feature extraction and classification techniques. In addition, our
review study includes a detailed analysis of current research gaps, potential application areas, and directions for future research in emotion
recognition.
4.3. Salient features of our systematic review
The uniqueness and salient features of our review study are listed
as follows and shown in Fig. 7:
1. Comprehensive use of datasets: Our review study explores
a comprehensive search strategy of different databases. The
authors have scanned renowned databases, including Web of
Science, MEDLINE, PubMed/PubMed Central, IEEE Explore, Scopus, Wiley, and others for selecting the most relevant research
studies.
2. Systematic review: Our developed review study follows strict
PRISMA guidelines for selecting relevant research articles.
3. Time window: We have considered a time window of last
10 years, for scanning and selecting the articles included in the
review.
4. Multi-modal emotion recognition: We have included physiological signals (EEG, ECG, ET, and GSR) and physical activity
(speech and facial expression). In addition, we have used AI comprised of ML and DL techniques used for emotion recognition.
5. Diverse emotion model: We have included articles on discrete and multi-dimensional emotional models to develop our
review study. Also, we have confined our search for articles to
peer-reviewed journals.
Fig. 7. Highlights and key points included in the review method for emotion
recognition.
6. Datasets: We have also presented a comprehensive analysis
of the available datasets used for emotion recognition using
different modalities.
7. Analysis: We have presented a detailed analysis and discussion
of existing studies included in the current review.
8. Challenges and future Directions: We identified current challenges, presented a detailed discussion and future directions for
research. We also explored the application areas of emotion
recognition in various fields.
5. Review method
The current systematic review uses the recommended reporting
elements for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (PRISMA) guidelines [35]. The review protocol includes search strategies, selection
criteria, selection standards, and data extraction. The details of search,
selection, and extraction strategies are covered in the following subsections:

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
Table 1
Criteria adopted for inclusion and exclusion for article selection.
Inclusion
(i) emotion recognition
(ii) classification of emotions using EEG signals
(iii) emotion recognition and EEG signals
(iv) detection of emotion using EEG signals
(v) emotion recognition using physiological signals
(vi) detection of emotions using ECG signals
(vii) emotion recognition using ECG signals
(viii) automated emotion recognition using physiological signals
(ix) machine learning and deep learning for emotion recognition
(x) GSR and emotion classification
(xi) galvanic skin response for emotion detection
(xii) automated emotion classification using GSR
(xiii) eye tracking and emotion classification
(xiv) emotion detection using eye tracking
(xv) automated emotion detection and eye tracking
(xvi) speech and emotion classification
(xvi) speech-based emotion recognition
(xvii) automated emotion detection using speech
(xviii) facial images and emotion classification
(xix) automated system for emotion classification using facial images
(xx) emotion and facial images
(xxi) automated human emotion recognition
(xxii) deep learning based emotion detection using facial images
Exclusion
(i) extension or repeated articles
(iii) articles published before 2014
(iii) conference articles
(iv) non-English research articles
(v) book chapters
(vi) non-peer reviewed articles
(vii) articles with statistical analysis
5.1. Search strategy and selection criteria
The search for relevant emotion recognition studies starts with
modalities like physiological signals, including EEG, ECG, GSR, and
ET, speech signals, and facial images. We have also looked for AI,
including ML and DL. We searched famous electronic databases, which
include Web of Science, MEDLINE, PubMed/PubMed Central, IEEE
Explore, Scopus, and Wiley to locate the desired articles on emotion
recognition. The authors limited their articles search to English language and journal articles. The search window for articles is adjusted
to the last 10 years, covering articles published between December
2013 to July 2023. The focus of the search was limited to physiological signals, emotion recognition or classification, facial images,
and AI. The key terms used to scan the relevant physiological signals covers ‘‘electroencephalogram’’, ‘‘electrocardiogram’’, ‘‘galvanic
skin response’’, ‘‘eye tracking’’, ‘‘electrooculogram’’, ‘‘EEG’’, ‘‘GSR’’,
‘‘EOG’’, ‘‘ET’’, ‘‘ECG’’, ‘‘EKG’’, and ‘‘speech’’. The search criteria for
emotions includes ‘‘emotion classification’’, ‘‘emotion detection’’, ‘‘emotion recognition’’, ‘‘emotion identification’’, and ‘‘emotion charting’’.
The search for image-based emotion recognition include ‘‘facial images’’, ‘‘images’’, ‘‘facial data’’, and ‘‘faces’’. Finally, ‘‘deep learning’’,
‘‘machine learning’’, ‘‘automated recognition’’, ‘‘classification’’, and ‘‘artificial intelligence’’ have been used for searching artificial intelligence.
The search criteria for scanning and selecting appropriate research
articles for emotion recognition was tedious and time-consuming.
Therefore, we have adopted inclusion and exclusion criteria for selecting relevant articles for our review study. Table 1 shows the adopted
criteria for including and excluding the research articles. Initially, in
stage one, authors reviewed the title, keywords, and abstract of articles.
After discussion, the authors decided to finalize the inclusion/exclusion
criteria for the articles. After initial screening, the full text of the
remaining articles was examined and analyzed in stage two.
5.2. Results
Fig. 8 shows the PRISMA guidelines used for screening and selecting relevant emotion recognition articles. We have categorized article
shortlisting into three steps: identification, screening, and inclusion.
Initially, a total of 14 257 articles were identified from six prestigious
databases and registers, including Web of Science, PubMed, MEDLINE,
Inspec, Scopus, and others. Based on the relevance of the study, we
selected 3846 articles, and discarded the remaining before screening.
During the screening stage, we retrieved 968 articles, of which 234
were screened for further assessment and excluded others. During the
final inclusion stage, out of 234 articles, 92 were excluded based on the
exclusion criteria, and 142 were selected for review. The distribution
includes 44 articles based on EEG, 20 articles on ECG-based emotion
recognition, 16 articles for GSR-based emotion recognition, 6 articles
on ET, and 28 articles each for speech- and facial image-based emotion
recognition. However, some articles are common for EEG-, ECG-, and
GSR-based emotion recognition. Fig. 9 shows the distribution of articles
based on time and publishers. The time-based analysis reveals that the
highest number of articles belongs to the year 2022, whereas, Elsevier
is the mostly preferred publisher followed by IEEE.
6. Summary of emotion recognition studies using EEG signals
The authors have selected 44 articles based on EEG-based emotion
recognition. In addition, 5 articles used EEG signals along with ECG and
GSR modalities taking a total count to 49. Table A.3 presents a detailed
summary of the EEG-based emotion recognition automated system.
6.1. Highlights of EEG-based emotion recognition
The time-based analysis reveals that the highest number of 12 studies have been reported from the year 2020, followed by 2021 and 2019
with 9 studies each. Elicitation of emotions from audio and video stimuli has been most widely preferred during EEG acquisition. EEG-based
emotion recognition has been conducted mostly on public EEG datasets
over private datasets. DEAP, SEED/SSED IV, and DREAMER have been
used most with individual occurrences of 22, 16, and 9 times, respectively. Classification of emotions based on V/A/D is preferred over
discrete emotions and positive (Pos)/Negative (Neg)/Neutral (Neu).
Classification of four basic emotions in the discrete model is highly preferred over other discrete classification models. Extraction of nonlinear
and statistical features is preferred for direct feature extraction. For
frequency domain features, power spectral density (PSD) is the most
commonly used technique for EEG-based emotion recognition. Decomposition techniques like wavelet-based decomposition, empirical mode
decomposition (EMD), and variational mode decomposition (VMD)
have been used the most to extract relevant features. In addition, shorttime Fourier transforms (STFT), Cohen’s class, and S-transform have
been utilized to extract time-frequency representation (TFR). The validation using k-fold cross-validation (FCV), particularly 10 FCV has been
preferred over leave one subject out/ leave one out validation (LOSO)
and holdout validation. ML models are used higher than DL models for
the classification of emotion. The detailed distribution summary of the
decision-making model is shown in Fig. 10. It is evident from Fig. 10
that SVM and its variant have been used the most, followed by KNN and
extreme learning machine (ELM) classifier. In DL taxonomy, CNN has
been used ten times followed by LSTM-based decision-making models.
6.2. Details of the EEG-based emotion datasets
Table B.9 presents the details of the EEG datasets used by the EEGbased emotion recognition studies. A total of 21 diverse EEG-based
emotion datasets have been used by included studies. It includes 15
publicly available datasets and 6 private datasets. One study each
used music, games, and VR as an elicitor, 2 studies used images, and
remaining used AV stimulus.

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
Fig. 8. Overview of the PRISMA guidelines followed during the selection of the articles in the systematic review.
Fig. 9. Details of the papers included after PRISMA guidelines (a) Publisher-based distribution and (b) Time-based analysis (Year-wise distribution).

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
Fig. 10. Summary of distribution for emotion recognition studies using EEG signals.
7. Summary of emotion recognition studies using ECG signals
A total of 23 articles have been discussed for ECG-based emotion
recognition as shown in Table A.4. Out of 23 articles, 20 articles
are related to only ECG-based emotion recognition and articles are
combined with EEG- and GSR-based studies.
7.1. Highlights of ECG-based emotion recognition
The year-wise distribution of ECG-based emotion recognition reveals that four articles belongs to the years 2017, 2020, and 2021, respectively. The year 2022 has three articles, two articles each for 2019
and 2023, and one for 2014, 2015, and 2018, respectively. Audio/video
and video-only based emotion elicitation have been the most common
choice, followed by images and music-based emotions contributing
equally to emotion elicitation. The researchers preferred public ECG
datasets over private ones for emotional state detection. From the
public datasets, five times DREAMER dataset has been used, three each
in the case of AMIGOS and ASCERTAIN, WESAD and MAHNOB-HCI
each used twice, and others once. Classification of V/A/D has been
the highest, followed by discrete emotion (four class) classification.
Extraction of features directly from ECG signals is preferred the most.
These include nonlinear features (NLF), statistical features (STSF), timedomain features (TDF), heart rate variability (HRV), frequency-domain
features (FDF), and rhythmic features. In addition, wavelet-based decomposition and EMD methods have been used for extracting representative features. The validation of the classification model mostly
used ten-FCV, followed by holdout and LOSO CV. The distribution of
decision-making models for ECG emotion classification is shown in
Fig. 11. As evident from Fig. 11, 15 times ML models have been used
for emotion recognition and 8 times the usage of DL models. SVM and
KNN are most efficient in ECG classification in ML taxonomy, while
CNN is more common in DL taxonomy.
7.2. Details of the ECG-based emotion datasets
A total of 18 ECG-based emotion datasets have been used in all the
articles included in our review. The details of the ECG-based emotion
datasets are shown in Table B.10. Emotion recognition studies explored
Fig. 11. Summary of distribution for emotion recognition studies using ECG signals.
privately developed datasets over public ECG datasets. Audio/video
stimuli have been the most preferred choice to elicit emotions, followed
by music and image-based stimuli. The acquisition system used three
electrode settings. V/A/D emotion classification type has been adopted
the most, followed by discrete emotion classification.
8. Summary of emotion recognition studies using GSR signals
A total of 18 articles have been discussed for GSR-based emotion
recognition as shown in Table A.5. Out of 18 articles, 16 articles used
only GSR-based emotion recognition, and 2 articles combined with
EEG- and ECG-based studies.
8.1. Highlights of GSR-based emotion recognition
Time-based analysis of GSR-based emotion recognition included in
the review shows that the highest number of articles (4 articles) were
from 2020. The year 2016 and 2017 includes three research articles
each, while the years 2018, 2019, 2021, and 2022 reported two articles
each, respectively. There are no articles from 2014, 2015, and 2023.
Elicitation of emotions using audio/video and music-based stimuli was
adopted most frequently. The DEAP and ASCERTAIN datasets were
used three times each, while the other one time. Researchers adopted
private GSR datasets for emotion recognition (11 times) over public
datasets (9 times). The classification of emotions in terms of V/A and
discrete emotions contributed equally. Direct extraction of STSF, NLF,
rhythmic features, and entropy features from GSR signals have been
used for the classification. Also, decomposition techniques like wavelet
decomposition, DWT, and EMD to extract information from GSR have
been used. The validation strategy also includes holdout and k-fold CV.
The classification strategies adopted for emotion recognition are shown
in Fig. 12. It has been observed from Fig. 12 that ML models have
been used more often than that DL models. Within ML models, SVM
and their variants have been the most common classification strategy
(7 times), followed by KNN and ensemble techniques (ET) used two
times each. CNN models, a combination of CNN with long-short-term
memory (LSTM) have been the favorites in DL models. Audio/video
stimuli have been the most preferred choice to elicit emotions, followed
by music stimuli (see Fig. 12).

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 



S.K. Khare et al.
Fig. 12. Summary of distribution for emotion recognition studies using GSR signals.
8.2. Details of the GSR-based emotion datasets
A total of 14 GSR-based emotion datasets have been used in all the
articles included in our review. The details of the GSR-based emotion
datasets are shown in Table B.11. Emotion recognition studies explored
privately developed datasets over public datasets. Audio/video stimuli
have been the most preferred choice to elicit emotions, followed by
music and image-based stimuli. The acquisition system used three
electrode settings. Classification of emotions from discrete emotion
models was explored the most, followed by V/A/D and affect states.
9. Summary of emotion recognition studies using ET signals
The detailed summary of ET-based emotion recognition is shown in
Table A.6. A total of 6 articles have been selected and included in our
review analysis.
9.1. Highlights of ET-based emotion recognition
Year-wise distribution of the articles shows that the highest number of three articles was published in 2021. In addition, the years
2019, 2020, and 2023 reported one article each. Three articles have
used video-based emotion elicitation, two articles reported image-based
emotion elicitation, and one article used virtual reality. Five articles
used the private ET emotion dataset, while only one ET dataset is
publicly available. All the articles have explored discrete emotion
classification, four of them using four basic emotion categories. STSF,
FDF, and NLP features have been extracted directly from ET signals.
One article used signal transformation using FFT and STFT. Holdout
validation and LOSO CV was the most prevalent for model validation.
The breakout of decision-making models for classification is shown in
Fig. 13. It is seen from Fig. 13 that for ET-based emotion classification,
DL models have been preferred over ML techniques.
9.2. Details of the ET-based emotion datasets
The details of the ET-based emotion dataset are shown in Table B.12. The summary shows that emotion recognition has used independent datasets for their analysis. Also, out of the six datasets used
Fig. 13. Summary of distribution for emotion recognition studies using ET signals.
for emotion recognition, five are privately developed, while one is
public. This limits the applicability and usability of ET-based emotion
recognition. Elicitation of emotions from videos was used three times,
images were used twice, and virtual reality was explored once.
10. Summary of emotion recognition studies using speech signals
For speech-based emotion recognition, we have selected 28 journal
articles. The summary of these articles used in the review analysis is
shown in Table A.7.
10.1. Highlights of speech-based emotion recognition
As evident from the summary of Table A.7, one article each has
been included from the years 2014, 2015, and 2017, respectively.
The highest articles, i.e. 8, have been reported from the year 2019,
followed by 6 articles in 2020, 5 in 2021, and 3 each in the years
2018 and 2022, respectively. The audio/video or audio based have
been used the most for emotion elicitation. The dataset analysis reveals
that EMO-DB, RAVDEES, CASIA, and IEMOCAP datasets have been
the most preferred choices for model testing. The highest strength of
speech-based emotion recognition is that multiple datasets have been
used for method verification. Public speech emotion datasets have been
selected over private datasets. Discrete type classification of emotions
has been adopted for all the studies. Power spectral density (PSD),
Mel-frequency cepstrum coefficients (MFCC), Mel spectrogram (MSG),
STFT, and variants of wavelet transform (WT) have been adopted the
most for feature extraction. Model validation using holdout CV was
preferred the most for speech, followed by k-FCV, and the least with
LOSO CV, respectively. The summary and distribution of the classification techniques used for emotion recognition are shown in Fig. 14.
The distribution shown in Fig. 14 reveals that DL models have an edge
over ML models for speech-based emotion recognition. The usage of the
SVM classifier was reported 7 times and the extreme learning machine
(ELM) classifier 2 times in ML-based decision-making. For DL models,
CNN was used 10 times, followed by LSTM and BiLSTM 3 times.

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
Fig. 14. Summary of distribution for emotion recognition studies using speech signals.
10.2. Details of the speech-based emotion datasets
The detailed summary of the speech-based emotion dataset is shown
in Table B.13. The details revealed that 19 datasets have been utilized
in speech-based emotion recognition studies. Among these, 11 datasets
are publicly available, while 8 datasets are private. Emotion classification using speech-preferred discrete emotion models with several
emotions varying from 3 to 12.
11. Summary of emotion recognition studies using facial images
The review included 28 articles on the recognition of emotions using
facial images. Table A.8 presents a summary of facial image-based
emotion recognition.
11.1. Highlights of facial images-based emotion recognition
The summary provided in Table A.8 reveals that the highest number
of articles have been from the years 2019 and 2020, respectively. Facial
image-based emotion recognition has one article each from the years
2015, 2016, and 2017, respectively. A total of 2, 4, and 5 articles have
been extracted from the years 2023, 2021, and 2022. The datasets CK+
and JAFFE have been the most commonly used facial image datasets.
In addition, FER2013, RAF-DB, and AffectNet have also been used in
many studies. The facial image-based emotion recognition studies have
validated their model on multiple datasets. The majority of the facial
image datasets are publicly available. A discrete emotion model is used
for classification with several emotions varying from 2 to 10. Features
based on geometric or texture of facial patterns are preferred. The
validation of the model using holdout CV followed by k-FCV strategies
is most common. The distribution of decision-making models for facial
images is shown in Fig. 15. Out of 28 articles, as many as 20 articles
have preferred DL models for classification, 7 used ML models, while
the status of one article is unknown. For ML models, the SVM classifier
has been the most preferred, while CNN has an upper edge over other
DL models.
Fig. 15. Summary of distribution for emotion recognition studies using facial images.
11.2. Details of the facial image-based emotion datasets
The details of facial image datasets used for emotion recognition
is shown in Table B.14. A total of 24 datasets have been used in
the studies included in our review, 21 datasets are publicly available,
while only 3 datasets are private. All the datasets used discrete emotion
classification.
12. Discussion
Emotion recognition using physiological signals like EEG, ECG, and
GSR has been majorly classified as valence, arousal, and dominance as
evident from Tables A.3, A.4, and A.5. In the case of the ET signals,
speech, and images, discrete emotion classification has been preferred
as shown in Tables A.6, A.7, and A.8. Audio/video-based elicitation
has been the most common and preferred technique. The following
subsection presents the discussion on individual modalities for emotion
recognition.
12.1. Takeaways from EEG-based emotion recognition studies
EEG signals are nonlinear and non-stationary with multi-frequency
components [36–38]. Therefore, to extract meaningful information
from multi-frequency EEG signals, decomposition techniques have been
highly preferred [36–39]. As evident from Table A.3, decomposition
techniques like discrete wavelet transform (DWT), tunable Q wavelet
transform (TQWT), flexible analytic wavelet transform (FAWT), dualtree complex wavelet transform (DT-CWT), EMD, VMD, and MVMD
have been extensively used to extract desired frequency bands and
instantaneous information about time and frequency [40–55]. The
features extracted from the sub-components of these decomposition
methods are further used for classification using ML-based techniques.
In addition, due to high temporal resolution and presence of multifrequency components, transforming time-series EEG to TFR using
STFT, smoothed pseudo-Wigner Ville distribution (SPWVD), S-trans
form, Wigner Ville distribution (WVD), and quadratic time-frequency
distribution (QTFD) have also been preferred [56–64]. The TFR obtained from these techniques is combined with DL models like CNN for

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
emotion recognition. The analysis shows that the highest accuracy of
100% has been achieved for valence, arousal, and dominance classification on the DREAMER dataset [54]. Similarly, an accuracy of 99.56%,
99.67%, and 99.55% for arousal, dominance, and valence has been
achieved on the DEAP dataset using LOSO CV [54]. Nonlinear decomposition techniques provide an effective representation of EEG signals,
due to which it has obtained the highest classification accuracy [54]. In
addition, extraction of TFR from EEG signals using SPWVD and TORbased on S-T in combination with CNN has resulted in an accuracy
of 93.01% and 94.58% for discrete emotion classification on private
EEG datasets [58,61]. Thus, the summary of Table A.3 reveals that the
decomposition techniques with ML models and the combination of TFR
with DL models have resulted in the highest performance, in terms of
accuracy, for emotion recognition.
12.2. Takeaways from ECG-based emotion recognition studies
ECG signals are quasi-stationary with a high signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR) compared to EEG signals. Therefore, direct feature extraction can
help to extract representative and meaningful information from ECG
signals. Thus ECG-based studies have preferred direct feature extraction
in terms of NLF, STSF, rhythmic, TDF, and FDF [53,65–75]. Since
ECG is quasi-stationary and contains mixed frequency components,
wavelet, and EMD-based decomposition have also attained high accuracy [65,76–78]. SVM and KNN-based ML techniques have successfully
classified different emotions due to their ability to draw accurate
boundaries between distinct emotion classes. Due to the rhythmic
nature and high SNR of ECG signals, DL techniques have extracted
representative features, which has resulted in high system performance
[53,73,74,79–83]. The highest accuracy of 100% has been achieved
for discrete emotion classification using rhythmic features clubbed with
SVM classifier on a private dataset [66]. In another study, researchers
obtained 100% accuracy for classifying discrete emotions as well as
the classification of valence and arousal [77]. The authors in [77] used
wavelet-based features and a probabilistic neural network (PNN) classifier. The combination of CNN and LSTM has resulted in an accuracy of
98.73% and 90.5% using DL models on public AMIGOS and DREAMER
datasets [82].
12.3. Takeaways from GSR-based emotion recognition studies
Like EEG and ECG signals, GSR signals are also non-stationary
and nonlinear. Therefore, extracting meaningful and representative
information from them is preferred. Features are extracted in the
form of NLF, STSF, entropy, TDF, FDF, and/or rhythms [53,67,84–90].
Decomposition techniques based on EMD and wavelets were explored,
due to their ability to extract crucial characteristics required for the
classification of emotions [77,85,91–93]. Extraction of features or decomposition makes it easy for classifiers to draw decision boundaries
for different emotions. Therefore, ML models like SVM and KNN have
yielded very high classification accuracy. Also, transforming a signal
to another domain and applying DL models has been effective for
emotion recognition [53,82,94,95]. The highest accuracy of 100% has
been obtained for features based on Poincare plots (PCP), Lyapunov
exponent (LE), and approximate entropy (APEN) using PNN classifier
on the DEAP dataset [87]. Similarly, the study based on EMD and
TDF using SVM classifier has also achieved the perfect classification of
emotions on a private dataset [91]. In addition, statistical features [89],
wavelet analysis [77], NLF [90], and DWT [93] have also achieved
high accuracy for emotion detection. Thus, direct extraction of STSF,
entropy, TDF, FDF, and NLF can provide accurate emotion representation using GSR signals. Also, wavelets and decomposition techniques
can extract discriminative characteristics from GSR signals for emotion
recognition.
12.4. Takeaways from ET-based emotion recognition studies
The summary of Table A.6 reveals that NLF, STSF, and FDF of
ET signals can provide a better emotion representation [96–99]. In
addition, DL models can also extract representative features, which
has resulted in high accuracy [96,97,99]. The highest accuracy of 92%
has been achieved with STSF and deep multi-layer perceptron (DMLP)
classifier for valence state on the eSEE-d public dataset. However, more
analysis is still required to confirm these findings. Also, validation of
the model using holdout CV is prone to over-fitting thus, may not yield
the same performance during LOSO or k-FCV.
12.5. Takeaways from speech-based emotion recognition studies
Speech signals have prosody, non-stationary, language specificity,
and are context dependent. In addition, speech signals are non-station
ary, and some of them have periodicity [100]. Therefore, the representation of speech in spectral features using MFCC, MFC, STFT,
and WT has been effective for emotion recognition [101–112]. Statistical features have provided a discriminant representation of speech
signals, due to which it has obtained the effective classification of emotions [103,109,113,114]. The speech-based emotion recognition has attained higher accuracy when CNN models have been clubbed with spectral representation including simultaneous time and frequency information [107,109–112,114–117]. As mentioned earlier, due to prosody and
context dependency features of speech, attention-based CNN, LSTM,
and BiLSTM have also remained effective in speech-based emotion
classification [110,118–121]. The highest accuracy of 100% has been
achieved on EMO-DB and CASIA public datasets using MFCC features
and linear discriminant analysis classifier [105].
12.6. Takeaways from facial image-based emotion recognition studies
Facial images for emotion recognition involves facial characteristics.
Therefore, techniques like face extraction, geometric features, texture
features, and binary patterns have been the most effective [122–132].
Similarly, as emotions are recognized using images, CNN models have
been the most effective decision-making models due to their ability
to extract spatio-temporal characteristics. Attention-modules with CNN
have also been proven effective to detect face geometry for emotion
recognition [129,133–136]. The highest accuracy of 100% has been
achieved on JAFFE public image dataset using convolutional features
and the CNN model [137]. Similarly, an accuracy of 99.36% has been
obtained on the CK+ dataset using the CNN model [138]. An accuracy
of 99.59% has been achieved on the MMI dataset using optical flow
spatial–temporal feature (OFSTF) clubbed with the CNN model [136].
12.7. Overall summary of automated emotion recognition system
The graphical representation of the automated emotion recognition
for all the modalities used in the current review is shown in Fig. 16. The
summary reveals that physiological (EEG, ECG, ET, and GSR) and physical (speech) signals extensively explored feature extraction. Nonlinear
decomposition is mostly used for extracting meaningful information
from EEG, ECG, and GSR signals. Physiological signals (EEG, ECG, GSR,
and ET) contain multi-components, that are nonstationary and nonlinear nature. Therefore, decomposition techniques like EMD, VMD, and
wavelet transform (DWT, TQWT, FAWT, and others) provide effective
representation of various emotional states. Also, nonlinear and statistical features from the multi-components of EEG, ECG, GSR, and ET have
yielded the most representative characteristics for emotion recognition.
Frequency-domain features for speech and direct feature extraction for
ET are widely used. Deep features have been used the most for facial
images. The use of Mel-frequency cepstrum coefficients for speech and
face extraction for images has provided the discriminative features for
emotion recognition. Finally, for decision-making, the SVM-based ML

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
Fig. 16. Graphical representation and summary of included modalities emotion recognition.
modality has been the most effective and preferred classifier for EEG,
ECG, GSR, and ET signals. The review studies suggest that, for speech
signals and facial images, decision-making using CNN-based DL models
may result in the highest performance. The CNN models have inbuild
convolutional layers, which reduces the high dimensionality of images
without losing its information. Therefore, CNN models can effectively
extract features from images and learn to recognize patterns, making
them well suited for emotion recognition. Also, feature extraction
and transformation techniques are widely used for time-series input
signals, including EEG, ECG, GSR, speech, and ET. The overall analysis
has revealed that information fusion helps to improve the system’s
performance. The study shows that fusion of EEG with ECG/GSR, and
ECG with GSR or by fusing different features provided higher accuracy
than due to single modality [71,82,84,88,92,93]. Therefore, featureand sensor-level fusion obtained from multiple sources can be the better
option for emotion recognition.
The overall summary of the modalities covered in our review study
for emotion recognition with their strengths and weaknesses/future
recommendations are shown in Table 2. It is noteworthy to mention
that the summary is drawn based on our observations from the papers
included in the systematic review.
13. Challenges
After a thorough investigation of automated emotion recognition
systems, we have identified potential challenges in existing studies. The
major challenges in automated emotion recognition systems are listed
below:
13.1. Datasets
Most of the datasets used for emotion recognition are available
publicly. However, the majority of them have been utilized to their
maximum capacity, resulting in the highest classification accuracy.
In addition, the available datasets have been acquired with a single
modality i.e., either for EEG, ECG, ET, GSR, speech, or facial images.
Therefore, there still exists a research gap in analyzing emotion recognition using multiple modalities from the same subject. Also, the lack of
availability of public emotion datasets for healthcare, brain-computer
interfaces, and other applications limits such analysis.
13.2. Adaptive analysis and classification
The physiological and physical signals are nonlinear, multi-frequ
ency components, and vary spontaneously [39,139,140]. Accurate and
effective analysis of such signals can be accomplished with feature
extraction and decomposition techniques. But, to extract meaningful
information from such signal, tuning of parameters is required [46,47].
However, our review study shows that few studies have been explored
for an adaptive analysis of these signals. These data-driven models
have been tested on private EEG datasets [46,47]. Therefore, adaptive
analysis can be used for extracting representative information from
EEG, ECG, ET, GSR, and/or speech signals. Similarly, for classification,
ML and/or DL models require extensive tuning of hyper-parameters
for optimal performance. Empirical and pre-fixed settings of tuning
hyper-parameters may not yield desired performance.
13.3. Lack of generalization
The acquisition of physiological and physical signals has been done
with different systems. The varying system specifications and acquisition time, results in the generation of sequences of different lengths.
Our review analysis shows that research studies for emotion recognition
using EEG, ECG, GSR, and speech signals have been analyzed with
different segment lengths. The changing duration of signals to be
analyzed may not yield desired performance. The lack of information
and generalization on the selection of signal length makes it difficult for
the stakeholders to trust the decision given by the developed models.
13.4. Lack of trust in automated decision-making
It is difficult to trust the outcome of such an automated system, especially when the findings contrast or conflict with previous knowledge
or expectations. As a result, stakeholders, specialists, and physicians
are hesitant to rely on existing models to make decisions. This is
why, despite several significant technological improvements in signal
processing, feature engineering, and AI, these models fail to gain the
faith of experts. Furthermore, there are few occasions when real-time
support systems for decision-making are used in research facilities. This
is due to the inability of present emotion identification techniques
to explain the predictions provided by decision support systems. To
create confidence in automated systems, the models must explain the
judgments made by the automated system to experts.
14. Future recommendations and research directions
Our review study has identified unresolved research challenges in
current emotion recognition systems. Future research should concentrate on innovative ways to increase our understanding of numerous modalities and applications. The following explains the potential
directions for future research directions.

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
Table 2
Summary of emotion recognition studies included in the review with their strengths, limitations, and future directions.
Modality
Strengths
Future recommendations
EEG
• Well studied
• Comprehensive analysis of TDF, FDF, STSF, NLF, and TFR features
• Explored ML and DL models
• Attained maximum accuracy
• Validation of multiple datasets
• Availability of public datasets
• Uncertainty in performance
• Exhaustive use of available datasets
• Tested on cleaned and pre-processed data
• Lack of adaptivity
• Lack of explainability
• Non-uniformity in EEG segment length selection
• Limited usage of hyperparameter tuning
• Limited usage of fusion techniques
ECG
• Well studied
• Attained maximum accuracy
• Validation of multiple datasets
• Availability of public datasets
• Uncertainty in performance
• Exhaustive use of available datasets
• Tested on cleaned and pre-processed data
• Lack of adaptivity
• Explored mainly ML models
• Lack of explainability
• Non-uniformity in ECG segment length selection
• Limited usage of hyperparameter tuning
• Limited usage of fusion techniques
GSR
• Well studied
• Attained maximum accuracy
• Validation of multiple datasets
• Availability of public datasets
• Uncertainty in performance
• Exhaustive use of available datasets
• Tested on cleaned and pre-processed data
• Lack of adaptivity
• Explored mainly ML models
• Lack of explainability
• Non-uniformity in GSR segment length selection
• Limited usage of hyperparameter tuning
• Limited usage of fusion techniques
ET
• Usage of datasets generated from different stimuli
• Usage of direct feature extraction
• Generation of simple models
• Uncertainty in performance
• Limited public datasets
• Lack of adaptivity
• Lack of explainability
• Limited usage of hyperparameter tuning
Speech
• Comprehensive analysis of feature extraction techniques
• Models are generated and validated on multiple datasets
• Availability of public datasets
• Usage of ML and DL techniques
• Non-data driven models
• Frequency-domain feature centric
• Uncertainty in performance
• Lack of adaptivity
• Lack of explainability
• Limited usage of hyperparameter tuning
Facial images
• Models are generated and validated on multiple datasets
• Availability of public datasets
• Usage of ML and DL techniques
• Non-data driven models
• Uncertainty in performance
• Lack of adaptivity
• Lack of explainability
• Limited usage of hyperparameter tuning
14.1. Application of human emotion recognition
Emotion recognition covers many applications, including braincomputer interfaces, robotics, and healthcare. However, with the recent
technological advancements and rise in electronic gadget usage, emotion recognition can help to accelerate in various fields. Some of them
are listed below:
14.1.1. Detection and monitoring of medical conditions
Human emotion can reveal crucial information for health conditions
and numerous disorders. Research has been conducted on variations
of emotions in Parkinson’s disease (PD), schizophrenia, Alzheimer’s
disease (AZD), attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), Autism
spectrum disorder (ASD), epilepsy, and depression. Changes in the emotional states have been witnessed during PD. Variations in emotional
states during PD were observed using facial expressions, speech, and
EEG signals [141–144]. Few researches have also been conducted on
variations in emotions during schizophrenia. Studies have observed
that facial expressions, auditory, and EEG signals measure emotional
states in schizophrenia [145–147]. Reading the Mind in the Eyes Test,
facial expression, eye blinks, and contextual features shows variation
in emotions in AZD [148–151]. Facial expressions, text, EEG signals,
and emoji-based studies have shown emotional changes in depression
[152–154]. Changes in the emotional states in ADHD from facial processing and social cognition have been studied [155–157]. The study of
emotions from facial expressions, video games, speech signals, and EEG
has been used to detect ASD [158–161]. Similarly, facial expressions
and social cognition can be detected in seizures and epilepsy [162,163].
Therefore, a thorough investigation can be explored for the detection
of various disorders from emotions. However, very few studies are
available due to the lack of availability of public datasets. Fig. 17 shows
an automated emotion-based physiological and neurological disorder
detection system.
14.1.2. Children health
The study and analysis of emotions in children can also play a
crucial role in their health monitoring. Studies revealed that emotional
development and regulation can be crucial in children with dyslexia
[164–166], depression [167,168], anxiety [169,170], and autism [171–
173]. Therefore, the study of facial expressions, speech, and physiological signals can be used to detect autism, depression, anxiety, and
dyslexia. Also, emotion recognition can play a crucial role to teach
children with autism and dyslexia.
14.1.3. Environmental health studies
Another potential application of human emotions recognition is
in environmental health studies. It is known that the physical environment can have an influence on emotions and, ultimately, affect

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
Fig. 17. Overview of the emotion-based automated disorder detection system.
mental health. For instance, environmental stressors (e.g. air and noise
pollution) can be linked to a series of negative emotions, e.g., annoyance, anger, disappointment, dissatisfaction, helplessness, anxiety,
and agitation [174,175]. However, a deep understanding of the mental
effects due to various environmental factors has been limited by, among
others, the difficulty in measuring complex emotional states in humans.
14.1.4. Human-robot interactions
The rise in AI has boosted the development of human-modeled
machines. The applications of human emotions have attracted researchers to investigate human-machine interfaces and sentimental
analysis. Human-machine interfaces can infer and understand human
emotions, making them more successful in human interactions; the
models should be able to interpret human emotions and adapt their
behavior appropriately, resulting in an acceptable reaction to those
sentiments.
14.1.5. Patience assistance
Emotion can be pivotal in patient monitoring and assistance. Effective analysis of emotion can help to sense and detect loneliness, mood
variations, and suicidal cues.
14.1.6. Driving assistance
Emotion recognition can also be used to detect driver’s fatigue. Facial expressions, eye movements, and/or EEG can be used in real-time
driver fatigue monitoring.
14.1.7. Education
Accurate and effective analysis of emotions can help to study students’ level of satisfaction in education.
14.1.8. Marketing
A camera with AI systems in shopping malls can be used to read the
real-time emotions of customers, which may be used for marketing.
14.1.9. Recruitment
Automated analysis of an automatic emotion recognition system can
be used for recruitment. Analysis of emotions during interviews can be
used to monitor the stress level of candidates.
14.1.10. Business models
People show numerous expressions and thoughts about various
products. Retailers can use customers’ thoughts and feeling to improve
the in-store experience. Its purpose is to compare data from typical
satisfaction evaluations to data from emotion recognition technologies
to determine whether emotion recognition can offer a complete picture
or perhaps replace satisfaction measurements [176,177].
14.1.11. E-learning
We have seen a drastic increase in electronic gadgets and internet
services usage since the COVID era. Online environments and virtual
classrooms can provide uninterrupted learning, and emotion detection
technology assists in identifying students’ emotional and understanding
levels in real-time. This information may be used to create class content
based on children’s diverse learning capacities [178,179].
14.2. Generation of multimodal public datasets
Human emotions can be studied to detect various disorders, but
such studies have not been explored to their maximum capacity. One
reason is that lack of available and diverse datasets. Therefore, the
development of such datasets and making them available freely to
the research community can boost emotion-based physiological disorder detection. Also, instead of focusing on a uni-modal dataset, the
development of a multi-modal dataset can enrich and explore higher
possibilities for extended emotion recognition studies. Accessibility and
authorization criteria must be simple and fast so that specialists can
avoid waiting for a long period. Data collecting methodologies and processes should be made accessible so that other research organizations
can replicate them and gather more data for study.
14.3. Development of wearable emotion recognition systems
Physical signals, including speech, gesture, facial expression, text,
posture, etc. are susceptible to false positives. Such signals can be
voluntarily changed resulting in false emotion classifications [47,180].
Our review analysis shows that EEG signals have been widely preferred for emotion recognition, but usage of numerous EEG sensors
for acquisition introduce system complexity. Emotions have also been
detected using ECG signals, which use only three channels [65,67,81,
181]. Thus, the usage of ECG signals for emotion recognition is advantageous in terms of the number of sensors and high signal-to-noise
ratio [39]. The human central nervous system is built in such a way
that alterations in one organ influence another. As a result, the brainheart relationship, brain-eyes interaction, and brain–heart–eyes–muscle
communication may be critical and beneficial in analyzing changes in
many organs [39,182]. Photoplethysmography (PPG) signals provide a
better representation of brain-heart interaction [183,184]. PPGs have
the advantage of not requiring specific setups or many electrodes for
signal collection. The sensors are attached to wristwatches, fingers, or
other wearable devices that are more accessible, less expensive, and
more practical than other physiological signals.

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
Fig. 18. Taxonomy of information fusion.
14.4. Distributed learning models
Huge volumes of data are being produced due to expansion in AI
and big data technology. The AI is booming due to the extraction of
valuable information from a large volume of data and has the potential
for the advancement of human society. The current automated emotion recognition models are developed using centralized ML. However,
data acquired from different regions can have subjective changes, geographical variations, and instrumental differences, which may provide
dynamic variations in the performance of traditional ML models. Also,
traditional ML uses centralized learning model, which suffers privacy
issues and communication load. To overcome this federated learning
(FL) can be used. The main goal of FL is to move model training from
a central server to client devices, allowing many client datasets to work
together on model training while protecting data privacy and lowering
communication costs. It uses a ‘‘data stationary, model moving’’ learning mode compared to centralized learning’s ‘‘model stationary, data
moving’’ method [185,186].
14.5. Information fusion
Information fusion, also known as data fusion, is a process that
combines, integrates, and analyzes data from numerous sources to
provide a more detailed and precise representation of the desired
phenomenon. The primary purpose of information fusion is to extract
subtle information from diverse often imperfect data sources, resulting
in enhanced decision-making, increased comprehension, and improved
performance in a variety of applications. There are various levels and
types of information fusion as shown in Fig. 18 and discussed below:
14.5.1. Sensor-level fusion
This level includes integrating unprocessed data from each sensor
without any processing or analytics. It is used to enhance data quality,
decrease noise, and deal with missing or incorrect data from certain
sensors [187].
14.5.2. Feature-level fusion
This level combines data from several sources that have been preprocessed and important characteristics extracted before being integrated [188]. This method seeks to minimize the data’s dimensionality
and establish a single feature representation for subsequent analysis.
14.5.3. Model fusion
Model fusion or model ensemble technique increases predictive
model performance and generalization [189]. Model fusion is based on
the notion of combining predictions from various independent models
in a manner to get a final, more robust prediction. Combining the capabilities of different models can frequently result in improved overall
prediction precision while reducing the risk of over-fitting.
14.5.4. Data-level fusion
Data-level fusion includes both sensor-level and feature-level fusion [190]. It entails integrating raw data from numerous sensors and
then extracting important characteristics from the combined data.
14.5.5. Hybrid fusion
Hybrid level combines two or more level of fusion techniques
e.g., feature-level and decision-level fusions. Suppose the classification
of physical signals is accomplished using feature-level fusion with a
single decision-making classifier. On the other hand, analysis of physiological signals can be accomplished using decision-level fusion. The final decision is generated by integrating feature-level and decision-level
fusions to generate the desired performance [191,192].
14.6. Application of explainability
Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) is a strategy for developing
AI systems that tries to give explicit and intelligible explanations for
the AI model’s decisions. The decision-making in AI models, such as
SVM, may be complicated to comprehend. This lack of transparency
creates issues, particularly in essential applications such as healthcare,
where knowing the logic behind AI choices is critical for trust, accountability, and safety. These issues are addressed by XAI approaches,
which make AI models more visible and interpretable. Clients, programmers, and stakeholders can understand how the AI system arrived
at a certain outcome by giving human-readable explanations. The
explanations provided by XAI approaches are transparent, which is
critical for model trust, bias and fairness, debugging, and improvement. For ML models, techniques include feature visualization (learning
patterns in the data), rule-based models (explicit rules for decisionmaking), local explanations (local explanations focus on explaining
specific predictions or decisions), and feature importance (LIME (Local
Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations) and SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations)) [193]. For CNN, heat-maps (class activation map
(CAM)) including Grad-CAM, Grad-CAM++, SMOOTHGRAD, U-CAM,
Eigen-CAM, and Score-CAM have been used for explanations [184]. An
overview of traditional ML models and XAI models is shown in Fig. 19.
14.7. Uncertainty quantification
Uncertainty quantification (UQ) is a collection of mathematical
and computational tools for assessing and characterizing uncertainty
in computational models, simulations, and data analysis [194–196].
Understanding the uncertainty associated with the results is critical
in many scientific and technical domains because precise predictions
are dependent on it [194]. Uncertainty can arise from various sources
including model formulation (from simplifications, assumptions, or approximations), input data (noise, missing data, or measurement errors),
model parameters (fixed parameters), approximations, and initial and
boundary conditions [197]. The sources of uncertainty can be measured
using UQ, which aims to address the following questions:

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
Fig. 19. Illustrative representation of XAI model (A) Traditional ML model and (B) XAI model with explanations.
Fig. 20. Illustrative uncertainty quantification of deterministic model (A) Traditional model with fixed parameter setting and (B) An UQ of the model with distributed parameter
settings.
• How do uncertainties in input parameters affect the model’s
predictions?
• What are the sources of uncertainty in the model and its input
parameters?
• How reliable are the model predictions?
• How can we improve the model and reduce uncertainties?
UQ entails estimating probability distributions, statistical moments
(mean, variance, etc.), and confidence intervals that indicate the uncertainty associated with the results. Some well-known techniques used for
UQ involve Bayesian inference, variance-based methods, Monte Carlo
methods, probabilistic collocation, ensemble modeling, and bootstrapping [194,198]. The graphical overview of uncertainty quantification
of a deterministic model is shown in Fig. 20.
15. Conclusion
Emotion recognition is crucial in multiple fields, including healthcare, E-learning, online shopping, etc. Our paper has presented a
fine-grained analysis of human emotions. This comprehensive analysis
of emotion recognition systems shows that decomposition techniques
provide insight information that extracts representative features from
physiological signals. The SVM-based ML decision-making has been
proven the most effective and preferred emotion recognition model.
The ability of DL models to automatically extract and classify deep
features is gaining popularity and has been increasing in the usage of
CNN models. Our review analysis shows that feature fusion and data
fusion help to improve the overall system performance. Hence, information fusion should be used in future emotion recognition models.
Emotions can be very helpful in certain healthcare applications, such as
Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, depression, and schizophrenia
detection, as well as in e-learning, market analysis, and human–robot
interactions. However, these fields have seen limited research in human emotion recognition systems, due to the lack of available public
datasets. Therefore, our review recommends developing and providing
accessible public datasets for increasing the applications of human
emotions research studies. The review shows that deep learning models
have gained popularity over traditional ML. Therefore, combination
of hybrid DL techniques using CNN, autoencoders, LSTM, and transformer models may be adopted for emotion recognition applications.
Also, accurate versatile models can be designed using federated meta
learning to train the automated systems on different datasets for a
particular application. Finally, we highlight the importance of model
explainability and uncertainty quantification in emotion recognition to
strengthen the trust and overall impact of AI models.

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
Table A.3
Summary of emotion recognition studies using EEG signals included in the review.
Ref.
Year
Sub.
Dataset
Dataset name
Status
Length
NCH
Emotion (Classes)
Feature extraction
Classification
Validation
Accuracy (%)
Decision
type
[199]
2019
20
AV
–
Private
10 s
1
Discrete (4)
DF with NLF
LSSVM
10 FCV
90.63
ML
[40]
2019
20
AV
–
Private
10 s
1
Discrete (4)
TQWT with STSF
ELM
10 FCV
87.1
ML
[41]
2022
23
AV
DREAMER
Public
–
14
V/A (9)
DWT and EMD with STSF
Ensemble ML
10 FCV
93.79 (A)
94.5 (V)
ML
15
AV
SEED
Public
–
12
Pos/Neg/Neu (3)
81.39 (A)
79.71 (V)
20
Music
MUSEC
Public
–
27
V/A (2)
81.96 (A)
82.27 (V)
43
AV
INTERFACES
Public
–
4
V/A (3)
59.67 (A)
59.67 (V)
[200]
2014
16
Image
–
Private
30 s
64
Discrete (5)
NLF
QDA
8 FCV
47.5
ML
[201]
2018
32
AV
DEAP
Public
12 s
32
V/A (2)
LF and NLF
SVM
LOSO CV
59.06
ML
15
AV
SEED
Public
12 s
62
Pos/Neg (2)
83.33
[42]
2022
32
AV
DEAP
Public
–
32
V/A (2)
VMD
DNN
Holdout
61.25 (A)
62.5 (V)
DL
[43]
2017
32
AV
DEAP
Public
4 s
10
DWT with ENT
KNN
10 FCV
86.75
ML
[56]
2021
32
AV
DEAP
Public
3 s
32
V/A/D (3)
PCC
CNN
Holdout
70.25 (A)
74.92 (V)
DL
V/A (2)
74.92 (A)
78.22 (V)
[202]
2019
32
AV
DEAP
Public
63 s
32
V/A/D (3)
MBFM
CapsNet
10 FCV
68.28 (A)
66.73 (V)
67.25 (D)
DL
[203]
2019
32
AV
DEAP
Public
1 s
32
V/A (2)
PSD
LSTM
10 FCV
74.38 (A)
81.1 (V)
DL
[204]
2020
15
AV
SEED
Public
12 s
62
Pos/Neg/Neu (3)
DGCNN
LOSO CV
79.95
DL
23
AV
DREAMER
Public
–
14
V/A/D (9)
PSD
84.54 (A)
86.23 (V)
85.02 (D)
32
AV
DEAP
Public
2 s
8
V/A (2)
72.81
[205]
2020
15
AV
SEED
Public
1.5 s
8
Pos/Neg (2)
Windowing
CNN
LOSO CV
86.56
DL
11
AV
LUMED
Public
0.6 s
8
Valence (2)
81.8
[44]
2020
20
AV
–
Private
–
16
V/A (2)
EMD with NLF
SVM
Holdout
74.88 (A)
82.63 (V)
ML
[57]
2020
15
AV
SEED
Public
1 s
32
Pos/Neg/Neu (3)
STFT
CNN
Holdout
90.59
DL
32
AV
DEAP
Public
1 s
32
V/A (9)
82.84
[45]
2016
32
AV
DEAP
Public
3 s
32
V/A (4)
EMD and SaENT
SVM
10 FCV
94.98 (BC)
ML
93.20 (MC)
[46]
2021
20
AV
–
Private
10 s
1
Discrete (4)
AVMD with NLF
ELM
10 FCV
97.24
ML
[47]
2020
20
AV
–
Private
10 s
1
Discrete (4)
ATQWT with STSF
LSSVM
10 FCV
95.7
ML
[58]
2021
20
AV
–
Private
10 s
16
Discrete (4)
SPWVD
CNN
Holdout
93.01
DL
[206]
2022
15
AV
SEED
Public
–
62
Pos/Neg/Neu (3)
DE
RGNN
LOSO CV
85.3
DL
15
AV
SEED IV
Public
62
Discrete (4)
73.84
[207]
2015
15
AV
SEED
Public
1 s
62
Pos/Neg/Neu (3)
DE
DBN
Holdout
86.08
DL
[59]
2019
27
AV
MAHNOB-HCI
Public
10 s
32
Valence
PSD and NetP
GELM
10 FCV
68
ML
15
AV
SEED
Public
10 s
62
Pos/Neg/Neu (3)
DE and NetP
88
[48]
2019
15
AV
SEED
Public
1 s
1
Pos/Neg/Neu (3)
FAWT and IPF
RF
10 FCV
92.84
ML
32
AV
DEAP
Public
1 s
1
Discrete (2)
80.64
1 s
1
Discrete (4)
72.07
[208]
2019
32
AV
DEAP
Public
1 s
32
Discrete (2)
PSD
CNN
10 FCV
100
DL
[49]
2020
15
AV
SEED
Public
5 s
62
Pos/Neg/Neu (3)
DT-CWT
SRU
Holdout
83.13
DL
32
AV
DEAP
Public
1 s
32
V/A (9)
90.91 (V)
90.87 (A)
[60]
2022
15
AV
SEED
Public
1 s
62
Pos/Neg/Neu (3)
STFT and DE
LSTM
LOSO CV
90.92
DL
37
AV
CMEED
Public
1 s
30
V/A (2)
94.21 (V)
88.03 (A)
[209]
2021
32
AV
DEAP
Public
1 s
32
V/A (9)
Windowing
DFR
10 FCV
97.69 (V)
97.53 (A)
DL
23
AV
DREAMER
Public
1 s
14
V/A/D (9)
89.03 (A)
90.41 (V)
89.89 (D)
[210]
2023
32
AV
DEAP
Public
6.25 s
1
V/A (9)
Windowing
ACRNN
10 FCV
93.72 (V)
93.38 (A)
DL
23
AV
DREAMER
Public
9.76 s
1
V/A/D (9)
97.98 (A)
97.93 (V)
89.23(D)
[61]
2020
20
AV
–
Private
10 s
1
Discrete (4)
TOR-based on S-TF
AlexNet (CNN)
Holdout
94.58
DL
[62]
2018
32
AV
DEAP
Public
4 s
23
V/A/D (9)
QTFDs
SVM
10 FCV
87 (V)
88.4 (A)
ML
[211]
2019
15
AV
SEED
Public
–
62
Pos/Neg (2)
NLF
SVM
LOSO CV
89
ML
32
AV
DEAP
Public
–
32
V/A/D (9)
72
[212]
2020
10
AV
–
Private
14
Discrete (3)
PSD and WE ENT
RVM
10 FCV
91.18
ML
[63]
2021
23
AV
DREAMER
Public
–
14
V/A (2)
THFM
CNN
88.20 (V)
90.43 (A)
DL
15
AV
SEED
Public
–
62
Pos/Neg (2)
88.45 (V)
32
AV
DEAP
Public
–
32
V/A (2)
10 FCV
76.61 (V)
77.72 (A)
40
AV
AMIGOS
Public
–
14
V/A (2)
87.39 (V)
90.54 (A)
[50]
2021
28
CG
GAMEEMO
Public
3.74 s
1
Discrete (4)
TQWT and FFP
SVM
10 FCV
99.82
ML
(continued on next page)

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
Table A.3 (continued).
Ref.
Year
Sub.
Dataset
Dataset name
Status
Length
NCH
Emotion (Classes)
Feature extraction
Classification
Validation
Accuracy (%)
Decision
type
[51]
2022
23
AV
DREAMER
Public
2 s
4
V/A/D (3)
MVMD and ResNet18
SVM
10 FCV
99.03 (A)
95.17 (D)
94.53 (V)
ML
40
AV
AMIGOS
Public
4
V/A/D (3)
96.68 (A)
97.45 (D)
95.58 (V)
[52]
2017
32
AV
DEAP
Public
5 s
8
V/A (2)
EMD and STSF
SVM
LOSO CV
69.10 (V)
71.99 (A)
ML
[213]
2022
15
AV
SEED IV
Public
4 s
62
Discrete (4)
NL, PSD, and DEC
GFIL
LOSO CV
79.17
ML
[214]
2020
32
AV
DEAP
Public
10 s
14
V/A/D (3)
PSD, ENT, WT, and FD
SVM
5 FCV
78.96 (A)
77.60 (D)
77.62 (V)
ML
[215]
2018
32
AV
DEAP
Public
–
18
V/A (2)
MEMD and STSF
KNN
LOSO CV
51.01 (A)
67 (V)
ML
[64]
2020
15
AV
SEED
Public
1 s
62
Pos/Neg/Neu (3)
STFT, DE and rhythms
CNN
5 FCV
91.68
DL
[216]
2016
32
DEAP
Public
4 s
19
Discrete (4)
FFT and rhythms
SVM
10 FCV
59.13
ML
Pos/Neg/Neu (3)
72.36
[53]
2019
23
AV
MPED
Private
1 s
62
Discrete (2)
PSD, NLF, and NL DEC
LSTM
Holdout
78.79
DL
Discrete (7)
42.1
[67]
2018
58
AV
ASCERTAIN
Public
8
V/A (2)
STSF
NB
LOSO CV
60 (A)
61 (V)
ML
[84]
2020
21
AV
–
Private
–
4
Discrete (4)
STSF
KNN
10 FCV
75
ML
23
AV
DREAMER
Public
10 s
4
V/A/D (3)
98.82 (A)
98.99 (D)
98.56 (V)
[217]
2021
32
AV
DEAP
Public
10 s
19
Discrete (4)
Rhythms
Deep CNN
10 FCV
98.45 (A)
98.69 (D)
98.91 (V)
DL
23
AV
DASPS
Public
10 s
14
V/A (2)
57.14
23
AV
DREAMER
Public
–
4
V/A/D (3)
100 (A)
100 (D)
100 (V)
[54]
2021
32
AV
DEAP
Public
–
19
Discrete (4)
TQWT with PP and STSF
SVM
LOSO CV
99.56 (A)
99.67 (D)
99.55 (V)
ML
28
CG
GAMEEMO
Public
–
1
Discrete (4)
100
[218]
2022
25
VR
VREED
Public
4 s
64
Pos/Neg (2)
DE
SVM
Holdout
76.22
ML
[55]
2022
165
Image
ICBrainDB
Public
3 s
128
Discrete (4)
TQWT with HOG, and LBP
KNN
10 FCV
90.77
ML
[82]
2020
40
AV
AMIGOS
Public
1 s
3
V/A(4)
Filtering
CNN-LSTM
Holdout
98.8 (Fused)
74.65 (EEG)
DL
23
AV
DREAMER
Public
3
V/A/D (4)
90.5 (Fused)
48.54 (EEG)
[71]
2021
20
AV
–
Private
–
14
V/A (4)
STSF and rhythms
SVM
10 FCV
82.63 (V)
74.88 (A)
EEG
ML
85.38 (V)
77.52 (A)
Fused

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 



S.K. Khare et al.
Table A.4
Summary of emotion recognition studies using ECG signals included in the review.
Ref.
Year
Sub.
Dataset
Dataset name
Status
Length
NCH
Emotion (Classes)
Feature extraction
Classification
Validation
Accuracy (%)
Decision
type
[65]
2021
40
AV
AMIGOS
Public
20 s
3
V/A (2)
WST, TDF, and FDF
Ensemble
10 FCV
88.8 (A)
88.9 (V)
ML
[66]
2017
69
Video
–
Private
20 s
3
Discrete (2)
Rhythmic features
SVM
10 FCV
100
ML
Image
100
AV
100
[67]
2018
58
AV
ASCERTAIN
Public
3
V/A (2)
NLF and rhythmic features
Naïve Bayes
LOSO CV
60 (V)
59 (A)
ML
[68]
2017
69
Video
–
Private
20 s
3
Discrete (5)
Rhythmic features
SVM
10 FCV
73.8
ML
Image
62.4
AV
72.8
[69]
2014
60
AV
–
Private
3.6 s
3
Discrete (6)
NLF
FKNN
Holdout
92.87
ML
[76]
2014
30
AV
–
Private
–
3
Discrete (6)
EMD with HHT
KNN
Holdout
40.14
ML
EMD
29.92
EMD with DFT
52.11
[70]
2020
–
Music
Augsburg university database
Public
–
Discrete (4)
Rhythmic features
FHMM
Holdout
95
ML
[79]
2022
23
Image
–
Private
20 s
3
V/A (2)
Filtering
CNN
10 FCV
76.19 (V)
80.95 (A)
DL
23
AV
DREAMER
Public
20 s
3
V/A (2)
97.56 (V)
96.34 (A)
[53]
2019
23
AV
MPED
Private
1 s
3
Pos/Neg/Neu (3)
FFT and NLF
LSTM
Holdout
53.2
DL
Discrete (2)
55.24
Discrete (7)
25.1
23
AV
DREAMER
Public
1 s
3
V/A (5)
–
87.7 (V)
87.4 (A)
[80]
2023
15
AV
WESAD
Public
1 s
3
Affect state (4)
–
CNN with CBAM
Holdout
97.5
DL
58
AV
ASCERTAIN
Public
1 s
3
V/A(7)
–
78.7 (V)
76.3 (A)
[219]
2017
24
AV
MAHNOB-HCI
Public
–
3
V/A(2)
HRV
SVM
–
60.83 (V)
65.73 (A)
ML
[81]
2021
15
AV
–
Private
3
Discrete (4)
Filtering and CWT
CNN-LSTM
LOSO CV
71.67
DL
[86]
2021
58
ASCERTAIN
Public
4 s
3
V/A (4)
Heart rate variability
SVM
10 FCV
78.32 (V)
76.83 (A)
ML
[71]
2021
20
AV
–
Private
–
3
V/A (2)
STSF and rhythmic features
SVM
10 FCV
76.65 (V)
70.15 (A)
ML
EEG-ECG
85.38 (V)
77.52 (A)
[72]
2015
27
Audio
–
Private
88 s
3
V/A (2)
NLF and LF
QDA
LOSO CV
84.72 (V)
84.26 (A)
ML
[220]
2020
86
AV
BioVid Emo DB
Public
68 s
3
Discrete (5)
Filtering
SVM
Holdout
80.89
ML
[73]
2022
23
AV
DREAMER
Public
–
3
V/A/D (–)
TDF, FDF, and NLF
CNN
10 FCV
95.16 (V)
85.56 (A)
77.54 (D)
DL
[82]
2020
40
AV
AMIGOS
Public
1 s
3
V/A (4)
Filtering and segmentation
CNN-LSTM
Holdout
98.8 (Fused)
98.73 (ECG)
DL
23
AV
DREAMER
Public
1 s
3
V/A/D (4)
90.8 (Fused)
90.5 (ECG)
[74]
2023
24
AV
MAHNOB-HCI
Public
15 s
3
V/A (2)
MRF and HRV
BiLSTM
10 FCV
83.61 (A)
78.28 (V)
DL
[77]
2017
11
Music
–
Private
–
16
Discrete (5)
WDEC and DCT
PNN
Holdout
100 (Discrete)
100 (V) 100
(A)
ML
[75]
2020
61
Music
–
Private
60 s
3
Discrete (4)
TDF, FDF, and NLF
LS-SVM
LOSO CV 10 FCV
68.1 (LOSO)
80.51 (10
FCV)
ML
[83]
2022
40
AV
AMIGOS
Public
20 s
3
V/A (4)
Windowing
SL CNN
10 FCV
88.9 (A)
87.5 (V)
DL
23
AV
DREAMER
Public
60 s
3
V/A (4)
85.9 (A)
85 (V)
25
AV
SWELL
Public
60 s
3
Discrete (4)
93.3 (Stress)
96.7 (A)
97.3 (V)
15
AV
WESAD
Public
5 s
3
Discrete (4)
96.9
[78]
2019
25
AV
–
Private
20 s
2
Discrete (4)
Rhythmic and EMD
Extra tree
10 FCV
70.09
ML
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Smith K. Khare: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Validation, Editing. Victoria Blanes-Vidal: Validation, Reviewing and editing. Esmaeil S. Nadimi: Validation, Reviewing and
editing. U. Rajendra Acharya: Conceptualization, Validation, Reviewing and editing.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article
Appendix A. Summary of the emotion recognition studies
See Tables A.3–A.8.
Appendix B. Summary of the emotion datasets
See Tables B.9–B.14.
Appendix C. Abbreviations
See Table C.15.

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
Table A.5
Summary of emotion recognition studies using GSR signals included in the review.
Ref.
Year
Sub.
Dataset
Dataset name
Status
Length
Emotion (Classes)
Feature extraction
Classification
Validation
Accuracy (%)
Decision
type
[77]
2017
11
Music
–
Private
–
Discrete (5)
WDEC and DCT
PNN
Holdout
99.59 (Discrete)
99.52 (V)
99.66 (A)
ML
[84]
2020
21
–
Private
–
Discrete (4)
STSF
KNN
10 FCV
72.61 (GSR)
79.76 (Fused)
ML
[85]
2017
32
AV
DEAP
Public
3 s
V/A/D (2)
DWT and EMD based STSF
RF
10 FCV
89.29 (V)
81.81 (A)
ML
[86]
2021
58
AV
ASCERTAIN
Public
4 s
V/A (4)
TDF and FDF
SVM
10 FCV
60.05 (V)
55.63 (A)
ML
Fused features
76.81 (V)
75.24 (A)
[87]
2020
32
AV
DEAP
Public
3 s
V/A/D (4)
PCP, LE, and APEN
PNN
5 FCV
100 (V) 100
(A)
ML
[94]
2019
100
AV
MDSTC dataset
Private
1 s
Discrete (6)
Spectrogram
CNN-LSTM
Holdout
Recall: 80.07
DL
[91]
2020
37
AV
–
Private
–
Discrete (3)
EMD and TDF
SVM
10 FCV
100
ML
[221]
2018
39
AV
–
Private
–
Discrete (3)
filtering
SVM
Holdout
75.65
ML
[88]
2016
30
AV
–
Private
–
Discrete (4)
STSF
RF
10 FCV
75 (Fused
features)
ML
[95]
2022
62
AV
MERTI-Apps
Public
1.1 s
V/A (2)
Windowing and filtering
1D AE
Holdout
81.33 (A)
80.25 (V)
DL
32
AV
DEAP
Public
1.1 s
V/A (3)
79.18 (A)
74.84 (V)
[89]
2021
34
Audio
–
Private
–
Discrete (4)
STSF
ANN
10 FCV
99.4
ML
15
AV
WESAD
Public
–
Discrete (4)
99.4
[92]
2016
11
Music
–
Private
10 s
V/A (3)
DWT
PNN
Holdout
95.10 (Dis)
97.90 (V)
95.80 (A)
ML
Discrete (5)
Fused 100
(Dis) 100
(V) 100
(A)
[90]
2017
35
Music
–
Private
10 s
Discrete (4)
NLF
LSSVM
5 FCV
99.98
ML
[222]
2022
58
AV
ASCERTAIN
Public
V/A (4)
–
SVM
–
99.67
ML
[93]
2016
11
Music
–
Private
–
V/A (3)
DWT with matching pursuit
PNN
Holdout
69.93 (Dis)
81.82 (V)
79.02 (A)
ML
Discrete (5)
Fused 99.64
(Dis)
99.51 (V)
99.44 (A)
Pos/Neg/Neu (3)
60.24
[53]
2019
23
AV
MPED
Private
1 s
Discrete (2)
FFT and NLF
LSTM
Holdout
63.37
DL
Discrete (7)
31.19
[67]
2018
58
AV
ASCERTAIN
Public
–
V/A (2)
NLF and rhythmic features
NB
LOSO CV
68 (V) 66 (A)
ML
[82]
2020
40
AV
AMIGOS
Public
1 s
V/A (4)
Filtering and segmentation
CNN-LSTM
Holdout
98.8 (Fused)
63.67 (GSR)
DL
Table A.6
Summary of emotion recognition studies using ET signals included in the review.
Ref.
Year
Sub.
Dataset
Dataset
Status
Length
Emotion
Feature
Classification
Validation
Accuracy
Decision
name
(Classes)
extraction
(%)
type
[96]
2021
16
Image
–
Private
–
Discrete (4)
FFT and STFT
with FDF
DGCNN
Holdout
87.97
DL
[97]
2023
48
Video
eSEE-d
Public
–
Discrete (4)
STSF
DMLP
10 FCV
92 (V) 81
(A)
DL
[223]
2021
10
Virtual reality
–
Private
–
Discrete (4)
–
SVM
LOSO CV
59.19
ML
[98]
2019
10
Video
–
Private
–
Discrete (4)
–
–
–
–
[224]
2020
30
Video
–
Private
–
Discrete (3)
NLF
SVM
LOSO CV
80
ML
[225]
2021
10
Image
–
Private
–
Discrete (8)
NLF and FDF
DGNN
Holdout
88.1
DL

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
Table A.7
Summary of emotion recognition studies using SPEECH signals included in the review.
Ref.
Year
Sub.
Dataset
Dataset name
Status
Length
Emotion (Classes)
Feature extraction
Classification
Validation
Accuracy
Decision
(%)
type
[101]
2020
24
AV
RAVDESS
Public
10 ms
Discrete (8)
MFCC and MS
CNN
Holdout
78.2
DL
[102]
2020
7
Audio
LDC
Public
Discrete (4)
MFCC and LPCC
SVM
Holdout
90.08
ML
[103]
2020
24
AV
RAVDESS
Public
10 ms
Discrete (8)
DWT, MFCC, and STSF
Decision Tree
Holdout
85
ML
10
AV
IEMOCAP
Private
–
Discrete (4)
86.1
[113]
2020
24
Acted
RAVDESS
Public
10 ms
Discrete (8)
STSF
1D CNN
5 FCV
71.61
DL
10
Audio
EMO-DB
Public
–
Discrete (7)
64.3
[226]
2014
10
Audio
EMO-DB
Public
–
Discrete (7)
Spectral analysis
KNN
Holdout
50
ML
[104]
2019
330
AV
AFEW
Public
40 ms
Discrete (7)
FFT and MSG
CNN
Holdout
60.59
DL
[105]
2022
10
Audio
EMO-DB
Public
2 s
Discrete (7)
MFCC and BLS
LDA
Holdout
100
ML
4
Audio
CASIA
Private
2 s
Discrete (6)
100
[106]
2015
10
Audio
EMO-DB
Public
–
Discrete (6)
Fourier parameters and MFCC
SVM
Holdout
88.88
ML
4
Audio
CASIA
Private
–
Discrete (6)
79
16
Audio
EESDB
Public
–
Discrete (4)
50.67
[107]
2019
10
AV
IEMOCAP
Private
–
Discrete (4)
SG and MFCC
CNN
5 FCV
73.6
DL
10
Audio
EMO-DB
Public
25 ms
Discrete (7)
92.45
[108]
2019
24
AV
RAVDESS
Public
25 ms
Discrete (8)
MFCC and SCF
Bagged tree
10 FCV
75.69
ML
10
Audio
IITKGP-SEHSC
Private
25 ms
Discrete (8)
84.11
42
AV
eNTERFACE
Public
–
Discrete (6)
89.6
[118]
2019
4
Audio
CASIA
Private
–
Discrete (6)
–
LSTM
Holdout
92.8
DL
AV
GEMEP
Private
–
Discrete (12)
57
[227]
2019
4
Audio
CASIA
Private
–
Discrete (6)
FFT
DNN-SVM
Holdout
72.92
DL
24
AV
RAVDESS
Public
0.5 s
Discrete (8)
77.02
[119]
2020
10
AV
IEMOCAP
Private
0.5 s
Discrete (4)
clustering
BiLSTM
Holdout
72.25
DL
10
Audio
EMO-DB
Public
0.5 s
Discrete (7)
85.57
10
Audio
EMO-DB
Public
–
Discrete (7)
89.65
[120]
2021
24
AV
RAVDESS
Public
–
Discrete (8)
PSF and EE
SVM
7 FCV
82.59
ML
14
AV
SAVEE
Public
–
Discrete (7)
77.74
4
Audio
CASIA
Private
–
Discrete (6)
90.28
[109]
2018
14
AV
SAVEE
Public
–
Discrete (7)
MFCC and STSF
BEL
Holdout
76.4
DL
51
Audio
FAU
Private
–
Discrete (7)
71.05
[115]
2022
10
AV
IEMOCAP
Private
10 ms
Discrete (4)
SIT
CNN (ResNet152)
Holdout
82.25
DL
10
Audio
EMO-DB
Public
10 ms
Discrete (7)
5 FCV
96.14
[116]
2019
10
Audio
EMO-DB
Public
–
Discrete (7)
STFT
CNN
Holdout
77.33
DL
[228]
2021
2
Audio
TESS
Public
2–3 s
Discrete (6)
EMD with ENT
LDA
10 folf CV
93.3
ML
[110]
2021
10
AV
IEMOCAP
Private
20 ms
Discrete (4)
MFCC, ZCR, spectral spread, and centroid
LSTM
Holdout
72.5
DL
[121]
2019
10
Audio
EMO-DB
Public
20 ms
Discrete (7)
PSCF
ELM
Holdout
91.02
ML
14
AV
Amritaemo Arabic database
Private
20 ms
Discrete (6)
86.98
[229]
2017
10
AV
IEMOCAP
Private
25 ms
Discrete (4)
Log FT
CNN
LOSO CV
64.78
DL
[230]
2022
18
Audio
Turkish SER dataset
Private
5 s
Discrete (3)
TQWT and SLP
SVM
10 FCV
96.41
ML
45
Audio
English SER dataset
Private
5 s
Discrete (3)
94.97
[114]
2019
10
AV
IEMOCAP
Private
–
Discrete (4)
STFT and SG
CNN
5 FCV
81.75
DL
24
AV
RAVDESS
Public
–
Discrete (8)
79.5
[111]
2020
24
AV
RAVDESS
Public
–
Discrete (8)
MEL spectrogram
MLP
–
83.8
DL
10
AV
IEMOCAP
Private
–
Discrete (4)
CNN-SVM
81.3
10
Audio
EMO-DB
Public
–
Discrete (7)
SVM
95.1
14
AV
SAVEE
Public
–
Discrete (7)
SVM
82.1
[117]
2018
31
AV
BAUM
Public
10 ms
Discrete (12)
LMSG
CNN
LOSO CV
44.61
DL
10
Audio
EMO-DB
Public
10 ms
Discrete (7)
87.31
42
AV
eNTERFACE
Public
10 ms
Discrete (6)
79.25
8
AV
RML
Public
10 ms
Discrete (6)
75.34
[231]
2018
4
Audio
CASIA
Private
Discrete (6)
PSF
ELM
LOSO CV
89.6
ML
[112]
2021
24
AV
RAVDESS
Public
–
Discrete (8)
Spectrum and spectrogram
CNN
10 FCV
85
DL
10
Audio
EMO-DB
Public
–
Discrete (7)
95
14
AV
SAVEE
Public
–
Discrete (7)
82
[232]
2021
24
AV
RAVDESS
Public
–
Discrete (8)
TQWT with TSP
SVM
10 FCV
87.43
ML
10
Audio
EMO-DB
Public
–
Discrete (7)
90.09
14
AV
SAVEE
Public
–
Discrete (7)
84.79
6
Audio
EMOVO
Public
–
Discrete (7)
79.08

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
Table A.8
Summary of emotion recognition studies using IMAGE signals included in the review.
Ref.
Year
Sub.
Dataset name
Status
No. of
images
Emotion
(Classes)
Feature extraction
Classification
Validation
Accuracy (%)
Decision
type
[122]
2022
70
KDEF
Public
4900
Discrete (7)
FLC
SVM
Holdout
85
ML
201
CK+
Public
3368
Discrete (7)
RF
97.86
[233]
2022
201
CK+
Public
3368
Discrete (7)
GM-WLBP, GLCM and GLRM
CNN-LSTM
Holdout
91.42
DL
10
JAFFE
Public
213
Discrete (7)
92.85
[123]
2022
337
CMU Multi-PIE
Public
750K+
Discrete (5)
Face extraction using MTCNN
MTCNN
Holdout
90
DL
–
AffectNet
Public
1M
Discrete (8)
90
[138]
2022
10
JAFFE
Public
213
Discrete (7)
Normalization, scaling, and
augmentation
CNN
Holdout
95.65
DL
118
CK+
Public
3150
Discrete (7)
99.36
[124]
2023
10
JAFFE
Public
213
Discrete (7)
RetinaFace
CNN
Holdout
98.44
DL
–
FER2013
Public
35,887
Discrete (7)
74.64
≈450 000
AffectNet
Public
1M
Discrete (8)
62.78
19
MMI
Public
4756
Discrete (6)
99.02
–
RAF-DB
15 539
Discrete (7)
72.84
[234]
2020
≈35,887
FER2013
Public
35,953
Discrete (7)
Reinforcement learning
CNN
Holdout
72.35
DL
–
ExpW
91 793
Discrete (7)
50.61
[125]
2019
123
CK+
Public
309
Discrete (7)
Geometric and texture
features
DAGSVM
–
91.11
ML
10
JAFFE
Public
213
Discrete (7)
63.33
52
MUG
Public
304
Discrete (6)
82.28
[235]
2021
–
CK+
Public
918
Discrete (7)
–
MobileNet CNN
Holdout
98.5
DL
[236]
2019
97
CK+
Public
8150
Discrete (7)
Gaussian normalization
CNN with RB
Holdout
93.24
DL
10
JAFFE
Public
213
Discrete (7)
95.23
[126]
2019
450 000
AffectNet
Public
220K+
Discrete (8)
MTCNN
Generater CAE
Holdout
74.8
DL
–
RAF-DB
15 539
Discrete (7)
81.83
[133]
2021
123
CK+
Public
593
Discrete (7)
SIFT, HOG, and LBP
Attention
CNN
Holdout
98
DL
–
FER2013
Public
35,887
Discrete (7)
70.02
10
JAFFE
Public
213
Discrete (7)
92.8
–
FERG
Public
55,767
Discrete (7)
99.3
[127]
2020
SAVEE
Public
480
Discrete (7)
Facial graphs
ANN
Holdout
90
ML
[237]
2020
95
SFEW
Public
700
Discrete (7)
GGPI
GAN
Holdout
27.24
DL
100
BU-3DFE
Public
21 000
Discrete (7)
81.95
270
CMU Multi-PIE
Public
7655
Discrete (6)
92.09
[128]
2019
123
CK+
Public
593
Discrete (7)
Appearance and
geometric features
CNN
10 FCV
96.46
DL
10
JAFFE
Public
213
Discrete (7)
91.27
[238]
2019
–
FER2013
Public
35,887
Discrete (7)
Normalization, equalization,
and image edge
CNN
Holdout
88.56 (fused)
DL
–
LFW
Public
13 000
Discrete (7)
10
JAFFE
Public
213
Discrete (7)
98.52
[129]
2020
123
CK+
Public
593
Discrete (7)
Cropping and facial feature
extraction
CNN with attention
Holdout
98.9
DL
–
FER2013
Public
35,887
Discrete (7)
75.82
35
NCUFE
Private
26,950
Discrete (7)
94.33
80
Oulu-CASIA
Public
2880
Discrete (6)
94.63
[239]
2020
27
CK+
Public
450
Discrete (7)
Expressional vector
CNN
Holdout
85
DL
337
CMU Multi-PIE
Public
750K+
Discrete (5)
78
1573
NIST
Public
3248
–
96
[134]
2019
–
AffectNet
Public
300K
Discrete (8)
Position level features
BiRNN
Holdout
–
DL
[240]
2021
123
CK+
Public
593
Discrete (7)
MSWGT
SVM
–
98.9
ML
10
JAFFE
Public
213
Discrete (7)
97.1
18
FEEDTUM
Public
–
Discrete (7)
95.8
[241]
2016
20
–
Private
700
Discrete (7)
BOWT
SVM
10 FCV
96.77
ML
[135]
2020
–
Downloaded
Private
23,164
Discrete (8)
–
ResNet-MldrNet
5 FCV
67.75
DL
[242]
2023
–
FER2013
Public
35,887
Discrete (7)
Gray scale
CNN
Holdout
54
DL
[136]
2019
67
RaFD
Public
1608
Discrete (8)
OFSTF
CNN with
inception
Holdout
99.17
DL
123
CK+
Public
593
Discrete (7)
98.38
88
MMI
Public
5042
Discrete (9)
99.59
[130]
2020
67
Turkey student DB
Private
–
Discrete (7)
Facial features
–
–
–
[137]
2021
70
KDEF
Public
4900
Discrete (7)
Convolutional-based
features
CNN (DenseNet121)
Holdout 10 FCV
98.78 (Holdout)
96.51 (10 FCV)
DL
10
JAFFE
Public
213
Discrete (7)
100 (Holdout)
99.52 (10 fold CV)
[131]
2015
–
CK+
Public
329
Discrete (6)
Salient facial patches
SVM
10 FCV
94.09
ML
10
JAFFE
Public
183
Discrete (6)
91.79
[243]
2017
2,64,683
SocialMedia
Public
2 mil.
Discrete (10)
Generic and special features
SVM
Holdout
–
ML
[132]
2022
–
UNBC-McMaster
Public
88 427
Discrete (2)
Aligned face crop
LSTM
LOSO CV
90.3
DL
123
CK+
Public
593
Discrete (7)
97.2

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
Table B.9
Details of the EEG datasets used for emotion recognition.
Ref.
Subjects
Dataset
Dataset
name
Status of
dataset
Recorder
NCH
Samp.
Freq.
Type of
classification
Evoked emotions
Selfassessment
[199]
20
AV
–
Private
EEG
traveler
24
256
Discrete
emotions
Happy, fear, sad, and relax
SAM
[244]
23
AV
DREAMER
Public
Emotive
EPOC
14
128
V/A/D
Amusement, surprise,
excite- ment, happiness,
calmness, anger, disgust,
fear, and sadness
SAM
[207,
245]
15
AV
SEED
Public
ESI
NeuroScan
System
62
200
Pos/Neu/Neg
Positive, neutral, and
negative
PQES,
FAM, UL
[246]
20
Music
MUSEC
Public
g.USBamp
62
1200
V/A
Favored Melody, favored
Song, non-favored Melody,
non-favored Song
–
[247]
32
AV
DEAP
Public
Biosemi
ActiveTwo
32
128
V/A/D/liking
LALV, HALV, LAHV, and
HAHV
SAM
[248]
43
AV
INTER-
FACES
Public
OpenBCI
8
250
V/A
Happiness, Excitement, and
Fear
SAM
[200]
16
Images
–
Private
g.USBamp
64
512
V/A/D
Happy, curious, angry, sad,
and quiet
SAM
[249]
11
AV
LUMED
Public
Neuroelectrics
Enobio 8
8
500
V (Neg and
Pos)
Positive, neutral, and
negative
–
[44]
20
AV
–
Private
Emotiv
Epoc
16
–
V/A
Happy, relaxed, angry, sad
and disgust
SAM
[250]
15
AV
SEED IV
Public
ESI
NeuroScan
System
62
200
Discrete
emotions
Happiness, sadness, fear,
and neutral
PANAS
[251]
27
AV
MAHNOB-
HCI
Public
Biosemi
Active II s
32
1024
Valence
Amusement, joy, neutral,
sadness, fear, and disgust
SAM
[252,
253]
37
AV
CMEED
Public
NuAmps 40
32
128
V/A
Positive, neutral, and
negative
SAM
[212]
10
AV
–
Private
Emotiv
EPOC
14
Discrete
emotions
Happiness, neutral, and
sadness
SAM
[254]
40
AV
AMIGOS
Public
Emotiv
EPOC
14
128
V/A/D
Neutral, Disgust,
Happiness, Surprise, Anger,
Fear and Sadness
SAM
[255]
28
Games
GAMEEMO
Public
EMOTIV
EPOC
14
128
Discrete
emotions
Funny, Boring, Horror,
Calm
SAM
[256]
23
AV
MPED
Private
ESI
NeuroScan
System
62
1000
Discrete
emotions
Joy, funny, anger, fear,
sadness, disgust, and
neutral
PANAS,
SAM, and
DES
[257]
58
AV
ASCER-
TAIN
Public
Neuro Sky
EEG
8
32
V/A
Arousal, Valence,
Engagement Liking,
Familiarity
SAM
[258]
23
AV
DASPS
Public
Emotiv
EPOC
14
128
V/A
LALV, HALV, LAHV, and
HAHV
SAM and
HAM-A
[259]
25
VR
VREED
Public
Wireless
EEG device
64
1000
Neg and Pos
Neg and Pos
–
[260]
165
Image
ICBrainDB
Public
Brain
Products
actiChamp
128
1000
Discrete
emotions
Happy, angry, sad, and
neutral
–
[71]
20
AV
–
Private
Emotive
EPOC
14
128
V/A
LALV, HALV, LAHV, and
HAHV
SAM

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
Table B.10
Details of the ECG datasets used for emotion recognition.
Ref.
Subjects
Dataset
Dataset
name
Status of
dataset
Recorder
NCH
Samp.
Freq.
Type of
classification
Evoked emotions
Selfassessment
[254]
40
AV
AMIGOS
Public
SHIMMER
3
256
V/A/D
Neutral, Disgust,
Happiness, Surprise,
Anger, Fear and Sadness
SAM
[66]
69
Image
Video
AV
–
Private
Radio
frequency
type device
3
960
Discrete
emotions
Happy, neutral, and
anger
–
[257]
58
AV
ASCER-
TAIN
Public
–
3
–
V/A
Arousal, Valence,
Engagement Liking,
Familiarity
SAM
[69]
60
AV
–
Private
Power Lab
data
Acquisition
3
1000
Discrete
Happiness, sadness, fear,
disgust, surprise and
neutral
SAM
[261]
–
Music
Augsburg
university
database
Public
–
–
256
Discrete
Joy, anger, sadness, and
pleasure
–
[79]
23
Image
–
Private
MP150
system
3
1000
V/A
Calm, relaxed, content,
glad, delighted, bored,
annoyed, depressed,
others, gloomy, afraid,
angry, excited
SAM
[244]
23
AV
DREAMER
Public
SHIMMER
3
256
V/A/D
Amusement, surprise,
excite- ment, happiness,
calmness, anger, disgust,
fear, and sadness
SAM
[256]
23
AV
MPED
Private
BIOPAC
System
3
250
Discrete
emotions
Joy, funny, anger, fear,
sadness, disgust, and
neutral
PANAS,
SAM, and
DES
[262]
15
AV
WESAD
Public
RespiBAN
Professional
3
700
Affect state
Neutral, stress,
amusement
PANAS,
STAI, and
SAM
[251]
24
AV
MAHNOB-
HCI
Public
Biosemi
active II
3
256
Valence
Amusement, joy,
neutral, sadness, fear,
and disgust
SAM
[81]
15
AV
–
Private
ECG
monitor
(PC-80B)
3
154
Discrete
emotions
Relax, scary, disgust,
and joy
SAM
[71]
20
AV
–
Private
–
3
128
V/A
Happy, relaxed, angry,
sad, and disgusted
SAM
[72]
27
Audio
–
Private
BIOPAC inc.
3
500
V/A
Low-medium valence
and medium-high
valence
SAM
[263]
86
AV
BioVid
Emo DB
Public
Nexus-32
3
512
Discrete
emotions
Amusement, sadness,
anger, disgust and fear
SAM
[77]
11
Music
–
Private
PowerLab
16
400
Discrete
emotions
Peacefulness, happiness,
sadness, rest, and scary
–
[75]
61
Music
–
Private
NeXus-10
3
2048
Discrete
emotions
Joy, tension, sadness,
and peacefulness
GEMS-9
[264]
25
AV
SWELL
Public
TMSI MOBI
device
3
2048
Affect state
Valence, arousal, and
stress
SAM
[78]
25
AV
–
Private
SpikerShield
Heart
2
1000
Discrete
emotions
Joy; sadness; pleasure;
anger; fear; and neutral
SAM

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
Table B.11
Details of the GSR datasets used for emotion recognition.
Ref.
Subjects
Dataset
Dataset
name
Status of
dataset
Recorder
Samp.
Freq.
Type of
classification
Evoked emotions
Selfassessment
[77]
11
Music
clips
–
Private
PowerLab
400
Discrete
emotions
Peacefulness, happiness,
sadness, rest, and scary
–
[84]
21
–
Private
Shimmer
256
Discrete
emotions
Happy, angry, sad, and
relaxed
SAM
[247]
32
AV
DEAP
Public
Biosemi
ActiveTwo
128
V/AD/liking
LALV, HALV, LAHV, and
HAHV
SAM
[94]
100
AV
MDSTC
Private
Customized
physiological
sensor device
200
Discrete
emotions
Surprise, angry, disgust,
happy, fear, and sad
SAM
[91]
37
AV
–
Private
Bluno Nano,
DFRobot
500
Discrete
emotions
Amusement, sadness, and
neutral
SAM
[257]
58
AV
ASCER-
TAIN
Public
–
256
V/A
Arousal, Valence, Engagement
Liking, Familiarity
SAM
[221]
39
AV
–
Private
–
–
Discrete
Positive, negative, and neutral
PANAS
[88]
30
AV
–
Private
BIOPAC MP150
1000
Discrete
Neutral, sadness, fear and
pleasure
SAM
[265]
62
AV
MERTI-
Apps
Public
BIOPAC MP150
1000
V/A
Happy, angry, sad, and scared
SAM
[89]
34
Audio
–
Private
MySignals
hardware
260
Discrete
Relax, stressed, partially
stressed, and happy
–
[262]
15
AV
WESAD
Public
RespiBAN
Professional
700
Affect state
Neutral, stress, amusement
PANAS,
STAI, and
SAM
[90]
35
Music
–
Private
PowerLab
400
Discrete
emotions
Happiness, sadness,
peacefulness, and scary
–
[256]
23
AV
MPED
Private
BIOPAC System
250
Discrete
emotions
Joy, funny, anger, fear,
sadness, disgust, and neutral
PANAS,
SAM, and
DES
[254]
40
AV
AMIGOS
Public
Shimmer
256
V/A/D
Neutral, Disgust, Happiness,
Surprise, Anger, Fear, and
Sadness
SAM
Table B.12
Details of the ET datasets used for emotion recognition.
Ref.
Subjects
Dataset
Dataset
name
Status of
dataset
Recorder
Samp.
Freq.
Type of
classification
Evoked emotions
Selfassessment
[96]
16
Image
–
Private
Tobii pro
eye-tracker
600
Discrete
emotions
Calm, happy, nervous, and sad
–
[97]
48
Video
eSEE-d
Public
Pupil Labs
240
Discrete
emotions
Anger, disgust, sadness and
tenderness
SAM
[223]
10
Virtual
reality
–
Private
Pupil Labs
Discrete
emotions
–
–
[98]
10
Video
–
Private
Tobii TX300
eye-tracker
300
Discrete
emotions
Joy, love, inspiration, and
serenity
–
[224]
30
Video
–
Private
EyeTribe
60
Discrete
emotions
Pleasant, neutral, and
unpleasant
SAM
[225]
10
Image
–
Private
Eye-Tracking
600
Discrete
emotions
Angry, disgust, fear, sad,
expect, happy, surprised, trust
SAM

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
Table B.13
Details of the SPEECH datasets used for emotion recognition.
Ref.
Subjects
Dataset
Dataset
name
Status of
dataset
Recorder
Samp.
Freq.
Type of
classification
Evoked emotions
Selfassessment
[266]
24
Audio
video
RAVDESS
Public
Rode NTK
48 K
Discrete
emotions
Calm, happy, sad, angry,
fearful, surprise, and disgust
expressions
SAM
[267]
7
Audio
LDC
Public
WAVES+
22.05
K
Discrete
emotions
Disgust, panic, anxiety, hot
anger, cold anger, despair,
sadness, elation, happy,
interest, boredome, shame,
pride, and contempt
–
[268]
10
Audio
video
IEMOCAP
Private
VICON motion
capture system
48 K
Discrete
emotions
Anger, happiness, sadness,
neutrality
SAM
[269]
10
Audio
EMO-DB
Public
Tascam DA-P1
16 K
Discrete
emotions
Disgust, sadness, happiness,
boredom, fear, neutral, and
anger
–
[270]
330
Audio
video
AFEW
Public
–
–
Discrete
emotions
Happiness, surprise, anger,
disgust, fear, sadness and
neutral
–
[271]
4
Audio
CASIA
Private
RODE K2
16 K
Discrete
emotions
Angry, happy, fear, sadness,
surprise and neutral
–
[272]
16
Audio
EESDB
Public
Cooleditpro
–
Discrete
emotions
Angry, disgust, fear, happy,
neutral, sad, and surprise
–
[273]
10
Audio
IITKGP-
SEHSC
Private
SHURE dynamic
cardioid
microphone
C660N
16 K
Discrete
emotions
Happy, Sad, Angry,
Sarcastic, Fear, Neutral,
Disgust, and Surprise
–
[274]
42
Audio
video
eNTERFACE
Public
D1/DV PAL
48 K
Discrete
emotions
Anger, Disgust, fear,
happiness, sadness, and
surprise
–
[275]
Audio
video
GEMEP
Private
SENNHEISER
41 K
Discrete
emotions
Amusement, pride, joy,
relief, interest, pleasure, hot
anger, panic fear, despair,
irritation, anxiety, sadness
SAM
[276–
278]
14
Audio
video
SAVEE
Public
Surrey
audio-visual
expressed emotion
database
44.1 K
Discrete
emotions
Anger, Disgust, Fear,
Happiness, Sadness,Surprise,
and Neutral
–
[279]
51
Audio
FAU
Private
SHURE UHF-serie
16 K
Discrete
emotions
Angry, Emphatic, Positive,
Neutral, and Rest
SAM
[280]
2
Audio
TESS
Public
–
–
Discrete
emotions
Anger, disgust, fear,
happiness, pleasant surprise,
sadness, and neutral
–
[121]
14
Audio
video
Amritaemo
Arabic
database
Private
Adobe Audition
software
16 K
Discrete
emotions
Anger, happy, sad, disgust,
surprise, and neutral
SAM
[230]
18
Audio
Turkish SER
dataset
Private
–
–
Discrete
emotions
Positive, negative, and
neutral
–
[230]
45
Audio
English SER
dataset
Private
–
–
Discrete
emotions
Interesting, boring, and
neutral
–
[281]
31
Audio
video
BAUM
Public
–
48 K
Discrete
emotions
Happiness, sadness, fear,
anger, disgust, confusion,
boredom, and interest
–
[282]
8
Audio
video
RML
Public
–
44.1 K
Discrete
emotions
Anger, disgust, fear, joy,
sadness, and surprise
–
[283]
6
Audio
EMOVO
Public
Marantz PMD670
48 K
Discrete
emotions
Neutral, Anger, Disgust,
Fear, Happiness, Sadness,
Surprise
SAM

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
Table B.14
Details of the IMAGE datasets used for emotion recognition.
Ref.
Subjects
Dataset
Dataset
name
Status of
dataset
Type of
classification
Evoked emotions
Selfassessment
[284]
70
KDEF
Public
4900
Discrete emotions
Angry, Fearful, Disgusted, Sad, Happy,
Surprised, and Neutral
–
[285]
210
CK+
Public
8150
Discrete emotions
Angry, Contempt, Disgust, Fear, Happy,
Sadness, and Surprise
FACS
[286]
10
JAFFE
Public
213
Discrete emotions
Happiness, sadness, surprise, anger, disgust,
fear, and neutral
–
[287,
288]
337
CMU
Multi-PIE
Public
750K+
Discrete emotions
Neutral, smile, surprise, squint, disgust, and
scream
–
[289]
–
AffectNet
Public
1M
Discrete emotions
Neutral, happy, sad, surprise, fear, disgust,
anger and contempt
SAM
[290]
–
FER2013
Public
31K+
Discrete emotions
Angry, Disgust, Fear, Happy, Sad, Surprise,
Neutral
–
[291]
88
MMI
Public
5042
Discrete emotions
Anger, fear, and sadness, happiness, surprise
and disgust
FACS
[292,
293]
–
RAF-DB
Public
29 672
Discrete emotions
Disgust, happy, sad, anger, fear, and surprise
SAM
[294]
–
ExpW
Public
91 793
Discrete emotions
Angry, disgust, fear, happy, sad, surprise, and
neutral
–
[295]
52
MUG
Public
304
Discrete emotions
Disgust, happy, sad, anger, fear, and surprise
FACS
[296]
–
FERG
Public
55K+
Discrete emotions
Angry, Disgust, Fear, Happy, Sad, Surprise,
Neutral
FACS
[276–
278]
–
SAVEE
Public
480
Discrete emotions
Anger, Disgust, Fear, Happiness, Sadness,
Surprise, Neutral
–
[297]
95
SFEW
Public
700
Discrete emotions
Anger, Disgust , Fear, Happiness , Sadness,
Surprise, and Neutral
SAM
[298]
100
BU-3DFE
Public
21K
Discrete emotions
Anger, Disgust , Fear, Happiness , Sadness,
Surprise, and Neutral
SAM
[299]
5749
LFW
Public
13 233
Discrete emotions
Angry, Disgust, Fear, Happy, Sad, Surprise,
Neutral
SAM
[129]
35
NCUFE
Private
26,950
Discrete emotions
Anger, disgust, fear, happiness, sadness,
surprise, and neural
–
[300]
80
Oulu-CASIA
Public
2880
Discrete emotions
Anger, disgust, fear, happiness, sadness, and
surprise
–
[301]
1573
NIST
Public
3248
–
–
–
[302]
18
FEEDTUM
Public
–
Discrete emotions
Neutral, anger, disgust, fear, happiness,
sadness and surprise
–
[135,
303]
–
Downloaded
Private
23,164
Discrete emotions
Happy, sadness, surprise, anger, disgust, fear,
and neutral
–
[304]
67
RaFD
Public
1608
Discrete emotions
Anger, disgust, fear, happiness, sadness,
surprise, contempt, and neutral
SAM
[130]
67
Turkey
student DB
Private
–
Discrete emotions
Disgust, sadness, happiness, fear, contempt,
anger, and surprise
FACS
[243]
2,64,683
SocialMedia
Public
21 mil.
Discrete emotions
Amusement, awe, contentment, excitement,
anger, disgust, fear, and sadness
SAM
[305]
–
UNBC-
McMaster
Public
48,398
Discrete emotions
Pain and no-pain
FACS

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
Table C.15
Abbreviations used in the review method.
A
Adaptive VMD (AVMD)
Adaptive TQWT (ATQWT)
Approximate entropy (APEN)
Artificial intelligence (AI)
Artificial neural network (ANN)
Arousal (A)
Attention-based convolutional recurrent neural network (ARCNN)
Audio/Video (AV)
Autoencoder (AE)
B
Binary class (BC)
BiOrthogonal wavelet transform (BOWT)
Brain emotional learning (BEL)
Broad learning system (BLS)
C
Capsule Net (CapsNet)
Continuous wavelet transform (CWT)
Convolutional autoencoder (CAE)
Convolutional neural network (CNN)
Convolutional Block Attention Module (CBAM)
Cross validation (CV)
D
Decomposition (DEC)
Deep forest (DFR)
Deep belief networks (DBN)
Deep learning (DL)
deep multilayer perceptron (DMLP)
Deep neural network (DNN)
Differential Emotions Scale (DES)
Differential entropy (DE)
Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG)
Discrete cosine transform (DCT)
Discrete Fourier transform (DFT)
Discrete wavelet transform (DWT)
Dominance (D)
Dual filtering (DF)
Dual-tree complex wavelet transform (DT-CWT)
Dynamic graph neural network (DGNN)
Dynamical Graph CNN (DGCNN)
E
Empirical mode decomposition (EMD)
Energy effective (EE)
Entropy (ENT)
Extreme learning machine (ELM)
F
Facial Action Coding System (FACS)
Facial landmark coordinates (FLC)
Familiarity (FAM)
Fast Fourier transform (FFT)
Fine KNN (FKNN)
Flexible analytic wavelet transform (FAWT)
Fold cross validation (FCV)
Fourier transform (FT)
Fractal dimension (FD)
Fractal Firat pattern (FFP)
Frequency-domain features (FDF)
Fuzzy Hidden Markov Model (FHMM)
(continued on next page)
Table C.15 (continued).
G
Generalized low-rank model (GLRM)
Generative adversarial network (GAN)
Geneva Emotional Music Scale (GEMS)
Geometry Guided Pose-Invariant (GGPI)
Geometric Mean based Weighted Local Binary Pattern (GM-WLBP)
Graph ELM (GELM)
Gray Level Co-occurrence Matrix (GLCM)
Graph-regularized least square regression with feature importance learning
(GFIL)
H
Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale (HAM-A)
Heart rate variability (HRV)
High arousal (HA)
High valence (HV)
Hilbert Huang transform (HHT)
Histogram of oriented gradients (HOG)
I
Information potential feature (IPF)
K
K nearest neighbor (KNN)
L
Leave one subject out (LOSO)
Least square SVM (LSSVM)
Linear features (LF )
Linear discriminant analysis (LDA)
Linear Predictive correlation coefficient (LPCC)
Local binary pattern (LBP)
Log Mel-spectrograms (LMSG)
Long short term memory (LSTM)
Low arousal (LA)
Low valence (LV)
Lyapunov exponents (LE)
M
Machine learning (ML)
Mel-frequency cepstrum coefficients (MFCC)
Mel spectrogram (MSG)
Modulation spectral (MS)
Morphological features (MRF)
Multiband feature matrix (MBFM)
Multiclass (MC)
Multilevel stationary wavelet gradient transform (MSWGT)
Multi Task Convolutional Neural Network (MTCNN)
Multivariate EMD (MEMD)
Multivariate VMD (MVMD)
N
Naïve Bayes (NB)
Negative (Neg)
Network pattern (NetP)
Neutral (Neu)
Nonlinear features (NLF)
O
One (1)-dimensional (1D)
Optical flow Spatial-Temporal feature (OFSTF)
(continued on next page)

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 



S.K. Khare et al.
Table C.15 (continued).
P
Pearson’s Correlation Coefficient (PCC)
Philippot questionnaire: emotion state (PQES)
Poincare plots (PCP)
Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS)
Positive (Pos)
Power spectral density (PSD)
Prime pattern (PP)
Probabilistic neural network (PNN)
Prosodic and spectral features (PSF)
Prosodic, spectral and cepstral features (PSCF)
Q
Quadratic discriminant analysis (QDA)
Quadratic time-frequency distributions (QTFDs)
R
Random forest (RF)
Regularized Graph Neural Networks (RGNN)
Relevance vector machine (RVM)
Residual block (RB)
S
S-transform (S-TF)
Scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT)
Sample Entropy (SaENT)
Self-Assessment Manikin (SAM)
Selflearned (SL)
Short-time Fourier transform (STFT)
Showlace pattern (SLP)
Simple Recurrent Units (SRU)
Smoothed Pseudo Wigner Ville distribution (SPWVD)
Speech-to-image transform (SIT)
Spectrogram (SG)
Spectral centroids featurs (SCF)
State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI)
Statistical features (STSF)
Support vector machine (SVM)
T
Time-domain features (TDF)
Time order representation (TOR)
Topographic and holographic feature maps (THFM)
Tunable Q wavvelet transform (TQWT)
Twine shuffle pattern (TSP)
U
Understandable level (UL)
V
Valence (V)
Variational mode decomposition (VMD)
Virtual reality (VR)
W
Wavelet decomposition (WDEC)
Wavelet energy (WE)
Wavelet scattering transform (WST)
Wavelet transform (WT)
Z
Zero-crossing rate (ZCR)
References
[1] K. Kamble, J. Sengupta, A comprehensive survey on emotion recognition based
on electroencephalograph (EEG) signals, Multimedia Tools Appl. (2023) 1–36.
[2] R.E. Dahl, A.G. Harvey, Sleep in children and adolescents with behavioral
and emotional disorders, Sleep Med. Clin. 2 (3) (2007) 501–511, http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.jsmc.2007.05.002, Sleep in Children and Adolescents. URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1556407X07000513.
[3] T.E. Feinberg, A. Rifkin, C. Schaffer, E. Walker, Facial discrimination and
emotional recognition in schizophrenia and affective disorders, Arch. Gen.
Psychiatry 43 (3) (1986) 276–279, http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.1986.
01800030094010.
[4] I.B. Mauss, A.S. Troy, M.K. LeBourgeois, Poorer sleep quality is associated with
lower emotion-regulation ability in a laboratory paradigm, Cogn. Emot. 27
(3) (2013) 567–576, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02699931.2012.727783, PMID:
23025547. arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1080/02699931.2012.727783.
[5] M.N. Dar, M.U. Akram, R. Yuvaraj, S. Gul Khawaja, M. Murugappan, EEG-based
emotion charting for Parkinson’s disease patients using Convolutional Recurrent
Neural Networks and cross dataset learning, Comput. Biol. Med. 144 (2022)
105327, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2022.105327, URL https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0010482522001196.
[6] J. Sun, J. Han, Y. Wang, P. Liu, Memristor-based neural network circuit of
emotion congruent memory with mental fatigue and emotion inhibition, IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst. 15 (3) (2021) 606–616, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/TBCAS.2021.3090786.
[7] S.S. Jasim, A.K.A. Hassan, Modern drowsiness detection techniques: A review,
Int. J. Electr. Comput. Eng. 12 (3) (2022) 2986.
[8] P. Lucey, J.F. Cohn, I. Matthews, S. Lucey, S. Sridharan, J. Howlett, K.M.
Prkachin, Automatically detecting pain in video through facial action units,
IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. B 41 (3) (2011) 664–674, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/TSMCB.2010.2082525.
[9] N. Jamil, N.H.M. Khir, M. Ismail, F.H.A. Razak, Gait-based emotion detection of
children with autism spectrum disorders: a preliminary investigation, Procedia
Comput. Sci. 76 (2015) 342–348.
[10] S. López-Martín, J. Albert, A. Fernández-Jaén, L. Carretié, Emotional distraction
in boys with ADHD: Neural and behavioral correlates, Brain Cogn. 83 (1)
(2013) 10–20, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bandc.2013.06.004, URL https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0278262613000845.
[11] T. Kircher, V. Arolt, A. Jansen, M. Pyka, I. Reinhardt, T. Kellermann, C.
Konrad, U. Lueken, A.T. Gloster, A.L. Gerlach, A. Ströhle, A. Wittmann, B.
Pfleiderer, H.-U. Wittchen, B. Straube, Effect of cognitive-behavioral therapy
on neural correlates of fear conditioning in panic disorder, Biol. Psychiat. 73
(1) (2013) 93–101, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2012.07.026, Structural and Functional Activity with Stress and Anxiety. URL https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0006322312006701.
[12] T. Dalgleish, The emotional brain, Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 5 (7) (2004) 583–589.
[13] T.S. Rached, A. Perkusich, Emotion recognition based on brain-computer
interface systems, in: R. Fazel-Rezai (Ed.), Brain-Computer Interface Systems,
IntechOpen, Rijeka, 2013, http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/56227, Ch. 13.
[14] P. Ekman, An argument for basic emotions, Cogn. Emot. 6 (3–4) (1992)
169–200.
[15] R. Plutchik, H. Kellerman, Theories of Emotion, Vol. 1, Academic Press, 2013.
[16] G.F. Wilson, C.A. Russell, Real-time assessment of mental workload using
psychophysiological measures and artificial neural networks, Hum. Factors 45
(4) (2003) 635–644.
[17] A. Mehrabian, Pleasure-arousal-dominance: A general framework for describing
and measuring individual differences in temperament, Curr. Psychol. 14 (1996)
261–292.
[18] V. Tran, Positive affect negative affect scale (PANAS), in: Encyclopedia of
Behavioral Medicine, Springer, 2020, pp. 1708–1709.
[19] M.M. Bradley, P.J. Lang, Measuring emotion: The self-assessment manikin
and the semantic differential, J. Behav. Ther. Exp. Psychiatry 25 (1) (1994)
49–59, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0005-7916(94)90063-9, URL https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0005791694900639.
[20] J.P. Pollak, P. Adams, G. Gay, PAM: A photographic affect meter for frequent,
in situ measurement of affect, CHI ’11, Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 2011, pp. 725–734, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1978942.
1979047.
[21] S. Kang, C.Y. Park, A. Kim, N. Cha, U. Lee, Understanding emotion changes
in mobile experience sampling, CHI ’22, Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 2022, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3501944.
[22] L. Shu, J. Xie, M. Yang, Z. Li, Z. Li, D. Liao, X. Xu, X. Yang, A review of
emotion recognition using physiological signals, Sensors 18 (7) (2018) 2074.
[23] H. Perry Fordson, X. Xing, K. Guo, X. Xu, Emotion recognition with knowledge
graph based on electrodermal activity, Front. Neurosci. 16 (2022) 911767.
[24] F. Larradet, R. Niewiadomski, G. Barresi, D.G. Caldwell, L.S. Mattos, Toward
emotion recognition from physiological signals in the wild: approaching the
methodological issues in real-life data collection, Front. Psychol. 11 (2020)
1111.
[25] D. Grühn, N. Sharifian, 7 - Lists of emotional stimuli, in: H.L. Meiselman (Ed.), Emotion Measurement, Woodhead Publishing, 2016, pp. 145–164,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-100508-8.00007-2,
URL
https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780081005088000072.
[26] G.N. Yannakakis, A. Paiva, Emotion in games, in: Handbook on Affective
Computing, Vol. 2014, Oxford University Press, 2014, pp. 459–471.
[27] R. Somarathna, T. Bednarz, G. Mohammadi, Virtual reality for emotion elicitation – a review, IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput. (2022) 1–21, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/taffc.2022.3181053.

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
[28] M.A. Hasnul, N.A.A. Aziz, S. Alelyani, M. Mohana, A.A. Aziz, Electrocardiogrambased emotion recognition systems and their applications in healthcare—A
review, Sensors 21 (15) (2021) http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/s21155015, URL
https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/21/15/5015.
[29] P.J. Bota, C. Wang, A.L.N. Fred, H. Plácido Da Silva, A review, current
challenges, and future possibilities on emotion recognition using machine
learning and physiological signals, IEEE Access 7 (2019) 140990–141020,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2944001.
[30] Y.B. Singh, S. Goel, A systematic literature review of speech emotion recognition
approaches, Neurocomputing 492 (2022) 245–263, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.neucom.2022.04.028, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0925231222003964.
[31] K. Kamble, J. Sengupta, A comprehensive survey on emotion recognition based
on electroencephalograph (EEG) signals, Multimedia Tools Appl. (2023) 1–36.
[32] J. Zhang, Z. Yin, P. Chen, S. Nichele, Emotion recognition using multi-modal
data and machine learning techniques: A tutorial and review, Inf. Fusion
59 (2020) 103–126, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2020.01.011, URL https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1566253519302532.
[33] R.R. Adyapady, B. Annappa, A comprehensive review of facial expression
recognition techniques, Multimedia Syst. 29 (1) (2023) 73–103.
[34] S. Ba, X. Hu, Measuring emotions in education using wearable devices: A
systematic review, Comput. Educ. 200 (2023) 104797, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.compedu.2023.104797.
[35] D. Moher, A. Liberati, J. Tetzlaff, D.G. Altman, P. Group*, Preferred reporting
items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement, Ann.
Intern. Med. 151 (4) (2009) 264–269.
[36] S.K. Khare, V. Bajaj, G.R. Sinha, Automatic drowsiness detection based on
variational non-linear chirp mode decomposition using electroencephalogram
signals, in: Modelling and Analysis of Active Biopotential Signals in Healthcare,
Volume 1, in: 2053-2563, IOP Publishing, 2020, http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/
978-0-7503-3279-8ch5, 5–1 to 5–25.
[37] S.K. Khare, V. Bajaj, A self-learned decomposition and classification model
for schizophrenia diagnosis, Comput. Methods Programs Biomed. 211 (2021)
106450,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cmpb.2021.106450,
URL
https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0169260721005241.
[38] S.K. Khare, N.B. Gaikwad, V. Bajaj, VHERS: A novel variational mode decomposition and Hilbert transform-based EEG rhythm separation for automatic ADHD
detection, IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 71 (2022) 1–10, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/TIM.2022.3204076.
[39] S.K. Khare, S. March, P.D. Barua, V.M. Gadre, U.R. Acharya, Application
of data fusion for automated detection of children with developmental and
mental disorders: A systematic review of the last decade, Inf. Fusion 99
(2023) 101898, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2023.101898, URL https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1566253523002142.
[40] A.H. Krishna, A.B. Sri, K.Y.V.S. Priyanka, S. Taran, V. Bajaj, Emotion classification using EEG signals based on tunable-q wavelet transform, IET Sci.
Meas. Technol. 13 (3) (2019) 375–380, http://dx.doi.org/10.1049/iet-smt.
2018.5237, arXiv:https://ietresearch.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1049/
iet-smt.2018.5237.
URL
https://ietresearch.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/
10.1049/iet-smt.2018.5237.
[41] K.S. Kamble, J. Sengupta, Ensemble machine learning-based affective computing
for emotion recognition using dual-decomposed EEG signals, IEEE Sens. J. 22
(3) (2022) 2496–2507, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2021.3135953.
[42] P. Pandey, K. Seeja, Subject independent emotion recognition from EEG using
VMD and deep learning, J. King Saud Univ. - Comput. Inf. Sci. 34 (5) (2022)
1730–1738, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jksuci.2019.11.003, URL https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1319157819309991.
[43] Z. Mohammadi, J. Frounchi, M. Amiri, Wavelet-based emotion recognition
system using EEG signal, Neural Comput. Appl. 28 (2017) 1985–1990.
[44] T. Chen, S. Ju, F. Ren, M. Fan, Y. Gu, EEG emotion recognition model
based on the LIBSVM classifier, Measurement 164 (2020) 108047, http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2020.108047, URL https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0263224120305856.
[45] Y. Zhang, X. Ji, S. Zhang, An approach to EEG-based emotion recognition using combined feature extraction method, Neurosci. Lett. 633 (2016)
152–157, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2016.09.037, URL https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304394016307200.
[46] S.K. Khare, V. Bajaj, An evolutionary optimized variational mode decomposition
for emotion recognition, IEEE Sens. J. 21 (2) (2021) 2035–2042, http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/JSEN.2020.3020915.
[47] S.K. Khare, V. Bajaj, G.R. Sinha, Adaptive tunable Q wavelet transform-based
emotion identification, IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 69 (12) (2020) 9609–9617,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TIM.2020.3006611.
[48] V. Gupta, M.D. Chopda, R.B. Pachori, Cross-subject emotion recognition using
flexible analytic wavelet transform from EEG signals, IEEE Sens. J. 19 (6) (2019)
2266–2274, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2018.2883497.
[49] C. Wei, L. lan Chen, Z. zhen Song, X. guang Lou, D. dong Li, EEG-based
emotion recognition using simple recurrent units network and ensemble learning, Biomed. Signal Process. Control 58 (2020) 101756, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.bspc.2019.101756, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1746809419303374.
[50] T. Tuncer, S. Dogan, A. Subasi, A new fractal pattern feature generation function
based emotion recognition method using EEG, Chaos Solitons Fractals 144
(2021) 110671, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chaos.2021.110671, URL https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0960077921000242.
[51] P.
V.,
A.
Bhattacharyya,
Human
emotion
recognition
based
on
time–
frequency analysis of multivariate EEG signal, Knowl.-Based Syst. 238 (2022)
107867, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2021.107867, URL https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0950705121010455.
[52] N. Zhuang, Y. Zeng, L. Tong, C. Zhang, H. Zhang, B. Yan, Emotion recognition
from EEG signals using multidimensional information in EMD domain, BioMed
Res. Int. 2017 (2017).
[53] T. Song, W. Zheng, C. Lu, Y. Zong, X. Zhang, Z. Cui, MPED: A multi-modal
physiological emotion database for discrete emotion recognition, IEEE Access 7
(2019) 12177–12191, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2891579.
[54] A.
Dogan,
M.
Akay,
P.D.
Barua,
M.
Baygin,
S.
Dogan,
T.
Tuncer,
A.H.
Dogru,
U.R.
Acharya,
PrimePatNet87:
Prime
pattern
and
tunable
q-factor wavelet transform techniques for automated accurate EEG emotion recognition, Comput. Biol. Med. 138 (2021) 104867, http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.104867, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0010482521006612.
[55] E. Deniz, N. Sobahi, N. Omar, A. Sengur, U.R. Acharya, Automated robust
human emotion classification system using hybrid EEG features with ICBrainDB
dataset, Health Inf. Sci. Syst. 10 (1) (2022) 31.
[56] M.R. Islam, M.M. Islam, M.M. Rahman, C. Mondal, S.K. Singha, M. Ahmad,
A. Awal, M.S. Islam, M.A. Moni, EEG channel correlation based model for
emotion recognition, Comput. Biol. Med. 136 (2021) 104757, http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.104757, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0010482521005515.
[57] F.
Wang,
S.
Wu,
W.
Zhang,
Z.
Xu,
Y.
Zhang,
C.
Wu,
S.
Coleman,
Emotion
recognition
with
convolutional
neural
network
and
EEG-based
EFDMs, Neuropsychologia 146 (2020) 107506, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
neuropsychologia.2020.107506, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0028393220301780.
[58] S.K. Khare, V. Bajaj, Time–frequency representation and convolutional neural
network-based emotion recognition, IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. 32
(7) (2021) 2901–2909, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2020.3008938.
[59] P. Li, H. Liu, Y. Si, C. Li, F. Li, X. Zhu, X. Huang, Y. Zeng, D. Yao, Y. Zhang,
P. Xu, EEG based emotion recognition by combining functional connectivity
network and local activations, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 66 (10) (2019)
2869–2881, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TBME.2019.2897651.
[60] X. Du, C. Ma, G. Zhang, J. Li, Y.-K. Lai, G. Zhao, X. Deng, Y.-J. Liu, H.
Wang, An efficient LSTM network for emotion recognition from multichannel
EEG signals, IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput. 13 (3) (2022) 1528–1540, http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2020.3013711.
[61] S.
Khare,
A.
Nishad,
A.
Upadhyay,
V.
Bajaj,
Classification
of
emotions
from
EEG
signals
using
time-order
representation
based
on
the
S-transform
and
convolutional
neural
network,
Electron.
Lett.
56
(25)
(2020)
1359–1361,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1049/el.2020.2380,
arXiv:https://
ietresearch.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1049/el.2020.2380. URL https:
//ietresearch.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1049/el.2020.2380.
[62] R. Alazrai, R. Homoud, H. Alwanni, M.I. Daoud, EEG-based emotion recognition using quadratic time-frequency distribution, Sensors 18 (8) (2018) http:
//dx.doi.org/10.3390/s18082739, URL https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/18/
8/2739.
[63] A.
Topic,
M.
Russo,
Emotion
recognition
based
on
EEG
feature
maps
through deep learning network, Eng. Sci. Technol. Int. J. 24 (6) (2021)
1442–1454, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jestch.2021.03.012, URL https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2215098621000768.
[64] S. Hwang, K. Hong, G. Son, H. Byun, Learning CNN features from DE features
for EEG-based emotion recognition, Pattern Anal. Appl. 23 (2020) 1323–1335.
[65] A. Sepúlveda, F. Castillo, C. Palma, M. Rodriguez-Fernandez, Emotion recognition from ECG signals using wavelet scattering and machine learning, Appl. Sci.
11 (11) (2021) http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/app11114945, URL https://www.
mdpi.com/2076-3417/11/11/4945.
[66] K.N. Minhad, S.H.M. Ali, M.B.I. Reaz, Happy-anger emotions classifications
from electrocardiogram signal for automobile driving safety and awareness, J.
Transp. Health 7 (2017) 75–89, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jth.2017.11.001,
Road Danger Reduction. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S2214140516303693.
[67] R. Subramanian, J. Wache, M.K. Abadi, R.L. Vieriu, S. Winkler, N. Sebe,
ASCERTAIN: Emotion and personality recognition using commercial sensors,
IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput. 9 (2) (2018) 147–160, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
TAFFC.2016.2625250.
[68] K. NISA’MINHAD, S.H.M. Ali, M.B.I. Reaz, A design framework for human
emotion recognition using electrocardiogram and skin conductance response
signals, J. Eng. Sci. Technol. 12 (11) (2017) 3102–3119.
[69] J. Selvaraj, M. Murugappan, K. Wan, S. Yaacob, Classification of emotional
states from electrocardiogram signals: a non-linear approach based on hurst,
Biomed. Eng. Online 12 (1) (2013) 1–18.

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
[70] S.-T.
Pan,
W.-C.
Li,
Fuzzy-HMM
modeling
for
emotion
detection
using
electrocardiogram
signals,
Asian
J.
Control
22
(6)
(2020)
2206–
2216,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/asjc.2375,
arXiv:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/pdf/10.1002/asjc.2375. URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/
10.1002/asjc.2375.
[71] T. Chen, H. Yin, X. Yuan, Y. Gu, F. Ren, X. Sun, Emotion recognition based on
fusion of long short-term memory networks and SVMs, Digit. Signal Process.
117 (2021) 103153, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.dsp.2021.103153, URL https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1051200421001925.
[72] M. Nardelli, G. Valenza, A. Greco, A. Lanata, E.P. Scilingo, Recognizing
emotions induced by affective sounds through heart rate variability, IEEE Trans.
Affect. Comput. 6 (4) (2015) 385–394, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2015.
2432810.
[73] S. Nita, S. Bitam, M. Heidet, A. Mellouk, A new data augmentation convolutional neural network for human emotion recognition based on ECG
signals, Biomed. Signal Process. Control 75 (2022) 103580, http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.bspc.2022.103580, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1746809422001021.
[74] F.E. Oğuz, A. Alkan, T. Schöler, Emotion detection from ECG signals with
different learning algorithms and automated feature engineering, Signal Image
Video Process. (2023) 1–9.
[75] Y.-L. Hsu, J.-S. Wang, W.-C. Chiang, C.-H. Hung, Automatic ECG-based emotion
recognition in music listening, IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput. 11 (1) (2020) 85–99,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2017.2781732.
[76] J. S, M. Murugappan, K. Wan, S. Yaacob, Electrocardiogram-based emotion
recognition system using empirical mode decomposition and discrete Fourier
transform, Expert Syst. 31 (2) (2014) 110–120, http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/exsy.
12014.
[77] An accurate emotion recognition system using ECG and GSR signals and
matching pursuit method.
[78] T. Dissanayake, Y. Rajapaksha, R. Ragel, I. Nawinne, An ensemble learning
approach for electrocardiogram sensor based human emotion recognition,
Sensors 19 (20) (2019) http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/s19204495, URL https://
www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/19/20/4495.
[79] D.S. Hammad, H. Monkaresi, ECG-based emotion detection via parallelextraction of temporal and spatial features using convolutional neural network,
Trait. Signal 39 (1) (2022).
[80] T. Fan, S. Qiu, Z. Wang, H. Zhao, J. Jiang, Y. Wang, J. Xu, T. Sun, N.
Jiang, A new deep convolutional neural network incorporating attentional
mechanisms for ECG emotion recognition, Comput. Biol. Med. 159 (2023)
106938, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2023.106938, URL https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0010482523004031.
[81] A.N. Khan, A.A. Ihalage, Y. Ma, B. Liu, Y. Liu, Y. Hao, Deep learning framework
for subject-independent emotion detection using wireless signals, PLOS ONE 16
(2) (2021) 1–16, http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0242946.
[82] M.N. Dar, M.U. Akram, S.G. Khawaja, A.N. Pujari, CNN and LSTM-based
emotion charting using physiological signals, Sensors 20 (16) (2020) http:
//dx.doi.org/10.3390/s20164551, URL https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/20/
16/4551.
[83] P. Sarkar, A. Etemad, Self-supervised ECG representation learning for emotion
recognition, IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput. 13 (3) (2022) 1541–1554, http://dx.
doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2020.3014842.
[84] A. Raheel, M. Majid, M. Alnowami, S.M. Anwar, Physiological sensors based
emotion recognition while experiencing tactile enhanced multimedia, Sensors
20 (14) (2020) http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/s20144037, URL https://www.mdpi.
com/1424-8220/20/14/4037.
[85] D. Ayata, Y. Yaslan, M. Kamasak, Emotion recognition via galvanic skin
response: Comparison of machine learning algorithms and feature extraction
methods, Istanb. Univ. - J. Electr. Electron. Eng. 17 (2017) ISSN: 1303–0914.
[86] Application
of
fractional
Fourier
transform
in
feature
extraction
from
ELECTROCARDIOGRAM
and
GALVANIC
SKIN
RESPONSE
for
emotion
recognition.
[87] A. Goshvarpour, A. Goshvarpour, The potential of photoplethysmogram and
galvanic skin response in emotion recognition using nonlinear features, Phys.
Eng. Sci. Med. 43 (1) (2020) 119–134.
[88] C. Li, C. Xu, Z. Feng, Analysis of physiological for emotion recognition with
the IRS model, Neurocomputing 178 (2016) 103–111, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.neucom.2015.07.112, Smart Computing for Large Scale Visual Data
Sensing and Processing. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0925231215016045.
[89] A Shrewd Artificial Neural Network-Based Hybrid Model for Pervasive Stress
Detection of Students Using Galvanic Skin Response and Electrocardiogram
Signals.
[90] A. Goshvarpour, A. Abbasi, A. Goshvarpour, S. Daneshvar, Discrimination
between different emotional states based on the chaotic behavior of galvanic
skin responses, Signal Image Video Process. 11 (2017) 1347–1355.
[91] J. Domínguez-Jiménez, K. Campo-Landines, J. Martínez-Santos, E. Delahoz,
S. Contreras-Ortiz, A machine learning model for emotion recognition from
physiological signals, Biomed. Signal Process. Control 55 (2020) 101646,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bspc.2019.101646, URL https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1746809419302277.
[92] Fusion framework for emotional electrocardiogram and galvanic skin response
recognition: Applying wavelet transform.
[93] A. Goshvarpour, A. Abbasi, A. Goshvarpour, S. Daneshvar, A novel signalbased fusion approach for accurate music emotion recognition, Biomed. Eng.:
Appl. Basis Commun. 28 (06) (2016) 1650040, http://dx.doi.org/10.4015/
S101623721650040X, arXiv:https://doi.org/10.4015/S101623721650040X.
[94] X. Sun, T. Hong, C. Li, F. Ren, Hybrid spatiotemporal models for sentiment classification via galvanic skin response, Neurocomputing 358 (2019)
385–400, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2019.05.061, URL https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0925231219307672.
[95] D.-H. Kang, D.-H. Kim, 1D convolutional autoencoder-based PPG and GSR
signals for real-time emotion classification, IEEE Access.
[96] Y.
Li,
J.
Deng,
Q.
Wu,
Y.
Wang,
Eye-tracking
signals
based
affective
classification employing deep gradient convolutional neural networks, 2021.
[97] V. Skaramagkas, E. Ktistakis, D. Manousos, E. Kazantzaki, N.S. Tachos, E.
Tripoliti, D.I. Fotiadis, M. Tsiknakis, eSEE-d: Emotional state estimation based
on eye-tracking dataset, Brain Sci. 13 (4) (2023) 589.
[98] N. Baharom, N. Jayabalan, M. Amin, S. Wibirama, Positive emotion recognition
through eye tracking technology, J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. (JAMT) 13 (2(1)) (1
1). URL https://jamt.utem.edu.my/jamt/article/view/5683.
[99] D. Bethge, L. Chuang, T. Grosse-Puppendahl, Analyzing transferability of
happiness detection via gaze tracking in multimedia applications, in: ACM
Symposium on Eye Tracking Research and Applications, in: ETRA ’20 Adjunct,
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2020, http://dx.
doi.org/10.1145/3379157.3391655.
[100] Y. Stylianou, Voice transformation: A survey, in: 2009 IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, 2009, pp. 3585–3588,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICASSP.2009.4960401.
[101] A. Christy, S. Vaithyasubramanian, J. A., M. Praveena, Multimodal speech
emotion recognition and classification using convolutional neural network
techniques, Int. J. Speech Technol. 23 (2020) 381–388, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1007/s10772-020-09713-y.
[102] M. Jain, S. Narayan, P. Balaji, B.K. P, A. Bhowmick, K. R, R.K. Muthu, Speech
emotion recognition using support vector machine, 2020, arXiv:2002.07590.
[103] A. Koduru, H. Valiveti, A. Budati, Feature extraction algorithms to improve
the speech emotion recognition rate, Int. J. Speech Technol. 23 (2020) 45–55,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10772-020-09672-4.
[104] M. Ren, W. Nie, A. Liu, Y. Su, Multi-modal Correlated Network for emotion
recognition in speech, Vis. Inform. 3 (3) (2019) 150–155, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.visinf.2019.10.003, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S2468502X19300488.
[105] Z. Yang, Y. Huang, Algorithm for speech emotion recognition classification
based on Mel-frequency Cepstral coefficients and broad learning system, Evol.
Intell. 15 (2021) 2485–2494, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12065-020-00532-3.
[106] K. Wang, N. An, B.N. Li, Y. Zhang, L. Li, Speech emotion recognition using
Fourier parameters, IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput. 6 (1) (2015) 69–75, http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2015.2392101.
[107] S. Tripathi, A. Kumar, A. Ramesh, C. Singh, P. Yenigalla, Deep learning based
emotion recognition system using speech features and transcriptions, 2019,
arXiv:1906.05681.
[108] A. Bhavan, P. Chauhan, Hitkul, R.R. Shah, Bagged support vector machines for emotion recognition from speech, Knowl.-Based Syst. 184 (2019)
104886, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2019.104886, URL https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0950705119303533.
[109] Z.-T. Liu, Q. Xie, M. Wu, W.-H. Cao, Y. Mei, J.-W. Mao, Speech emotion
recognition based on an improved brain emotion learning model, Neurocomputing 309 (2018) 145–156, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2018.05.005,
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0925231218305344.
[110] H. Xu, H. Zhang, K. Han, Y. Wang, Y. Peng, X. Li, Learning alignment for
multimodal emotion recognition from speech, 2020, arXiv:1909.05645.
[111] M. Farooq, F. Hussain, N.K. Baloch, F.R. Raja, H. Yu, Y.B. Zikria, Impact
of feature selection algorithm on speech emotion recognition using deep
convolutional neural network, Sensors 20 (21) (2020) http://dx.doi.org/10.
3390/s20216008, URL https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/20/21/6008.
[112] Mustaqeem, S. Kwon, Optimal feature selection based speech emotion recognition using two-stream deep convolutional neural network, Int. J. Intell. Syst.
36 (9) (2021) 5116–5135, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/int.22505, arXiv:https://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/int.22505. URL https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/int.22505.
[113] D. Issa, M. Fatih Demirci, A. Yazici, Speech emotion recognition with deep convolutional neural networks, Biomed. Signal Process. Control 59 (2020) 101894,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bspc.2020.101894, URL https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1746809420300501.
[114] Mustaqeem, S. Kwon, A CNN-assisted enhanced audio signal processing for
speech emotion recognition, Sensors 20 (1) (2020) http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/
s20010183, URL https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/20/1/183.
[115] A. Bakhshi, A. Harimi, S. Chalup, CyTex: Transforming speech to textured images for speech emotion recognition, Speech Commun. 139 (2022) 62–75, http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.specom.2022.02.007,
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0167639322000310.

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
[116] A. Badshah, N. Rahim, N. Ullah, J. Ahmad, K. Muhammad, M. Lee, S. Kwon,
S. Baik, Deep features-based speech emotion recognition for smart affective
services, Multimedia Tools Appl. 78 (2019) 5571–5589, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1007/s11042-017-5292-7.
[117] S. Zhang, S. Zhang, T. Huang, W. Gao, Speech emotion recognition using deep
convolutional neural network and discriminant temporal pyramid matching,
IEEE Trans. Multimed. 20 (6) (2018) 1576–1590, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
TMM.2017.2766843.
[118] Y. Xie, R. Liang, Z. Liang, C. Huang, C. Zou, B. Schuller, Speech emotion
classification using attention-based LSTM, IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio Speech Lang.
Process. 27 (11) (2019) 1675–1685, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TASLP.2019.
2925934.
[119] Mustaqeem, M. Sajjad, S. Kwon, Clustering-based speech emotion recognition
by incorporating learned features and deep BiLSTM, IEEE Access 8 (2020)
79861–79875, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2990405.
[120] S. Kanwal, S. Asghar, Speech emotion recognition using clustering based GAoptimized feature set, IEEE Access 9 (2021) 125830–125842, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3111659.
[121] Z. Xiao, E. Dellandréa, W. Dou, L. Chen, Multi-stage classification of emotional
speech motivated by a dimensional emotion model, Multimedia Tools Appl. 46
(2010) 119–145, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11042-009-0319-3.
[122] H.A. Shehu, W.N. Browne, H. Eisenbarth, An anti-attack method for emotion
categorization from images, Appl. Soft Comput. 128 (2022) 109456, http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2022.109456, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1568494622005695.
[123] S. Kuruvayil, S. Palaniswamy, Emotion recognition from facial images with
simultaneous occlusion, pose and illumination variations using meta-learning,
J. King Saud Univ. - Comput. Inf. Sci. 34 (9) (2022) 7271–7282, http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jksuci.2021.06.012, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1319157821001452.
[124] I. Haider, H.-J. Yang, G.-S. Lee, S.-H. Kim, Robust human face emotion
classification using triplet-loss-based deep CNN features and SVM, Sensors
23 (10) (2023) http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/s23104770, URL https://www.mdpi.
com/1424-8220/23/10/4770.
[125] D. Sen, S. Datta, R. Balasubramanian, Facial emotion classification using
concatenated geometric and textural features, Multimedia Tools Appl. 78 (2019)
10287–10323, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11042-018-6537-9.
[126] J. Deng, G. Pang, Z. Zhang, Z. Pang, H. Yang, G. Yang, cGAN based facial
expression recognition for human-robot interaction, IEEE Access 7 (2019)
9848–9859, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2891668.
[127] A.K. Hassan, S.N. Mohammed, A novel facial emotion recognition scheme based
on graph mining, Def. Technol. 16 (5) (2020) 1062–1072, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.dt.2019.12.006, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S2214914719307627.
[128] J.-H. Kim, B.-G. Kim, P.P. Roy, D.-M. Jeong, Efficient facial expression recognition algorithm based on hierarchical deep neural network structure, IEEE Access
7 (2019) 41273–41285, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2907327.
[129] J. Li, K. Jin, D. Zhou, N. Kubota, Z. Ju, Attention mechanism-based CNN
for facial expression recognition, Neurocomputing 411 (2020) 340–350, http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2020.06.014, URL https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0925231220309838.
[130] G. Tonguç, B. Ozaydın Ozkara, Automatic recognition of student emotions from
facial expressions during a lecture, Comput. Educ. 148 (2020) 103797, http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2019.103797, URL https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0360131519303471.
[131] S.L. Happy, A. Routray, Automatic facial expression recognition using features
of salient facial patches, IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput. 6 (1) (2015) 1–12,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2014.2386334.
[132] P. Rodriguez, G. Cucurull, J. Gonzàlez, J.M. Gonfaus, K. Nasrollahi, T.B. Moeslund, F.X. Roca, Deep pain: Exploiting long short-term memory networks for
facial expression classification, IEEE Trans. Cybern. 52 (5) (2022) 3314–3324,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TCYB.2017.2662199.
[133] S. Minaee, M. Minaei, A. Abdolrashidi, Deep-emotion: Facial expression recognition using attentional convolutional network, Sensors 21 (9) (2021) http:
//dx.doi.org/10.3390/s21093046, URL https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/21/
9/3046.
[134] W. Xiaohua, P. Muzi, P. Lijuan, H. Min, J. Chunhua, R. Fuji, Two-level
attention with two-stage multi-task learning for facial emotion recognition,
J. Vis. Commun. Image Represent. 62 (2019) 217–225, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.jvcir.2019.05.009, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1047320319301646.
[135] T. Rao, M. Xu, D. Xu, Learning multi-level deep representations for image
emotion classification, Neural Process. Lett. 51 (2016) 2043–2061.
[136] N. Sun, Q. Li, R. Huan, J. Liu, G. Han, Deep spatial-temporal feature fusion
for facial expression recognition in static images, Pattern Recognit. Lett. 119
(2019) 49–61, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.patrec.2017.10.022, Deep Learning
for Pattern Recognition. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0167865517303902.
[137] M.A.H. Akhand, S. Roy, N. Siddique, M.A.S. Kamal, T. Shimamura, Facial
emotion recognition using transfer learning in the deep CNN, Electronics 10
(9) (2021) http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/electronics10091036, URL https://www.
mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/9/1036.
[138] A. Khattak, M.Z. Asghar, M. Ali, U. Batool, An efficient deep learning technique for facial emotion recognition, Multimedia Tools Appl. 81 (2) (2022)
1649–1683, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11042-021-11298-w.
[139] M. Maithri, U. Raghavendra, A. Gudigar, J. Samanth, P.D. Barua, M. Murugappan, Y. Chakole, U.R. Acharya, Automated emotion recognition: Current
trends and future perspectives, Comput. Methods Programs Biomed. 215
(2022) 106646, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cmpb.2022.106646, URL https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0169260722000311.
[140] U. Raghavendra, A. Gudigar, Y. Chakole, P. Kasula, D.P. Subha, N.A. Kadri,
E.J. Ciaccio, U.R. Acharya, Automated detection and screening of depression using continuous wavelet transform with electroencephalogram signals,
Expert Syst. 40 (4) (2023) e12803, http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/exsy.12803,
arXiv:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/exsy.12803. URL https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/exsy.12803.
[141] M.N. Dar, M.U. Akram, R. Yuvaraj, S. Gul Khawaja, M. Murugappan, EEG-based
emotion charting for Parkinson’s disease patients using Convolutional Recurrent
Neural Networks and cross dataset learning, Comput. Biol. Med. 144 (2022)
105327, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2022.105327, URL https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0010482522001196.
[142] M. Murugappan, W. Alshuaib, A.K. Bourisly, S.K. Khare, S. Sruthi, V. Bajaj,
Tunable Q wavelet transform based emotion classification in Parkinson’s disease
using Electroencephalography, PLOS ONE 15 (11) (2020) 1–17, http://dx.doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0242014.
[143] S. Righi, G. Gronchi, S. Ramat, G. Gavazzi, F. Cecchi, M.P. Viggiano, Automatic
and controlled attentional orienting toward emotional faces in patients with
Parkinson’s disease, Cogn. Affect. Behav. Neurosci. 23 (2) (2023) 371–382.
[144] J. Skibińska, R. Burget, Parkinson’s disease detection based on changes of
emotions during speech, in: 2020 12th International Congress on Ultra Modern
Telecommunications and Control Systems and Workshops (ICUMT), 2020, pp.
124–130, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICUMT51630.2020.9222446.
[145] W.-L. Chu, M.-W. Huang, B.-L. Jian, K.-S. Cheng, Analysis of EEG entropy during
visual evocation of emotion in schizophrenia, Ann. Gen. Psychiatry 16 (2017)
1–9.
[146] D.I.
Leitman,
P.
Laukka,
P.N.
Juslin,
E.
Saccente,
P.
Butler,
D.C.
Javitt, Getting the cue: Sensory contributions to auditory emotion recognition
impairments
in
schizophrenia,
Schizophr.
Bull.
36
(3)
(2008)
545–556,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbn115,
arXiv:https://academic.
oup.com/schizophreniabulletin/article-pdf/36/3/545/5311926/sbn115.pdf.
[147] M.K. Mandal, U. Habel, R.C. Gur, Facial expression-based indicators of
schizophrenia: Evidence from recent research, Schizophr. Res. 252 (2023)
335–344, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2023.01.016, URL https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0920996423000282.
[148] N. Liu, Z. Yuan, Y. Chen, C. Liu, L. Wang, Learning implicit sentiments in
Alzheimer’s disease recognition with contextual attention features, Front. Aging
Neurosci. 15 (2023) 1122799.
[149] W. Maturana, I. Lobo, J. Landeira-Fernandez, D.C. Mograbi, Nondeclarative
associative learning in Alzheimer’s disease: An overview of eyeblink, fear, and
other emotion-based conditioning, Physiol. Behav. 268 (2023) 114250, http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.physbeh.2023.114250, URL https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0031938423001750.
[150] I. Ferrer-Cairols, L. Ferré-González, G. García-Lluch, C. Peña-Bautista, L.
Álvarez-Sánchez, M. Baquero, C. Cháfer-Pericás, Emotion recognition and
baseline cortisol levels relationship in early Alzheimer disease, Biol. Psychol.
177 (2023) 108511, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsycho.2023.108511, URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301051123000285.
[151] M. Brandt, F. de Oliveira Silva, J.P.S. Neto, M.A.T. Baptista, T. Belfort, I.B.
Lacerda, M.C.N. Dourado, Facial expression recognition of emotional situations
in mild and moderate Alzheimer’s disease, J. Geriatr. Psychiatry Neurol.
0 (0) (0) 08919887231175432. PMID: 37160761. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/
08919887231175432.
[152] S. Gupta, A. Singh, J. Ranjan, Multimodal, multiview and multitasking depression detection framework endorsed with auxiliary sentiment polarity and
emotion detection, Int. J. Syst. Assur. Eng. Manag. (2023) 1–16.
[153] M. Tadalagi, A.M. Joshi, AutoDep: automatic depression detection using facial
expressions based on linear binary pattern descriptor, Med. Biol. Eng. Comput.
59 (6) (2021) 1339–1354.
[154] H. Chang, Y. Zong, W. Zheng, C. Tang, J. Zhu, X. Li, Depression assessment
method: an EEG emotion recognition framework based on spatiotemporal neural
network, Front. Psychiatry 12 (2022) 837149.
[155] Ü. Aydin, R. Cañigueral, C. Tye, G. McLoughlin, Face processing in young adults
with autism and ADHD: An event related potentials study, Front. Psychiatry 14
(2023) 1080681.
[156] L. Sacco, L. Morellini, C. Cerami, The diagnosis and the therapy of social
cognition deficits in adults affected by ADHD and MCI, Front. Neurol. 14 (2023)
1162510.

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
[157] E. McKay, K. Cornish, H. Kirk, Impairments in emotion recognition and positive
emotion regulation predict social difficulties in adolescent with ADHD, Clin.
Child Psychol. Psychiatry 28 (3) (2023) 895–908, http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/
13591045221141770, PMID: 36440882.
[158] S. Le Sourn-Bissaoui, M. Aguert, P. Girard, C. Chevreuil, V. Laval, Emotional
speech comprehension in children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorders, J. Commun. Disord. 46 (4) (2013) 309–320, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.jcomdis.2013.03.002, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0021992413000105.
[159] R. Matin, D. Valles, A speech emotion recognition solution-based on support
vector machine for children with autism spectrum disorder to help identify human emotions, in: 2020 Intermountain Engineering, Technology and Computing
(IETC), 2020, pp. 1–6, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IETC47856.2020.9249147.
[160] M. Derbali, M. Jarrah, P. Randhawa, Autism spectrum disorder detection:
Video games based facial expression diagnosis using deep learning, Int. J. Adv.
Comput. Sci. Appl. 14 (1) (2023).
[161] N.F. Harun, N. Hamzah, N. Zaini, M.M. Sani, H. Norhazman, I.M. Yassin,
EEG classification analysis for diagnosing autism spectrum disorder based on
emotions, J. Telecommun. Electron. Comput. Eng. (JTEC) 10 (1–2) (2018)
87–93.
[162] S. Pick, J.D. Mellers, L.H. Goldstein, Explicit facial emotion processing in
patients with dissociative seizures, Psychosom. Med. 78 (7) (2016) 874–885.
[163] J. Amlerova, A.E. Cavanna, O. Bradac, A. Javurkova, J. Raudenska, P. Marusic, Emotion recognition and social cognition in temporal lobe epilepsy and
the effect of epilepsy surgery, Epilepsy Behav. 36 (2014) 86–89, http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.yebeh.2014.05.001, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1525505014001619.
[164] L.W. Carawan, B.A. Nalavany, C. Jenkins, Emotional experience with dyslexia
and self-esteem: the protective role of perceived family support in late
adulthood, Aging Ment. Health 20 (3) (2016) 284–294, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1080/13607863.2015.1008984, PMID: 25660279. arXiv:https://doi.org/10.
1080/13607863.2015.1008984.
[165] E.
Anyanwu,
A.
Campbell,
Childhood
emotional
experiences
leading
to
biopsychosocially-induced dyslexia and low academic performance in adolescence, Int. J. Adolesc. Med. Health 13 (3) (2001) 191–204, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1515/IJAMH.2001.13.3.191, [cited 2023-08-03].
[166] M. Doikou-Avlidou, The educational, social and emotional experiences of
students with dyslexia: The perspective of postsecondary education students,
Int. J. Spec. Educ. 30 (1) (2015) 132–145.
[167] P.M.
Cole,
J.
Luby,
M.W.
Sullivan,
Emotions
and
the
development
of
childhood depression: Bridging the gap, Child Dev. Perspect. 2 (3) (2008)
141–148,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1750-8606.2008.00056.x,
arXiv:https:
//srcd.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.1750-8606.2008.00056.x.
URL
https://srcd.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1750-8606.2008.
00056.x.
[168] S.
Siener,
K.A.
Kerns,
Emotion
regulation
and
depressive
symptoms
in
preadolescence, Child Psychiatry Hum. Dev. 43 (2012) 414–430.
[169] C. Suveg, J. Zeman, Emotion regulation in children with anxiety disorders,
J. Clin. Child Adolesc. Psychol. 33 (4) (2004) 750–759, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1207/s15374424jccp3304_10, PMID: 15498742.
[170] D.K. Hannesdottir, T.H. Ollendick, The role of emotion regulation in the
treatment of child anxiety disorders, Clin. Child Fam. Psychol. Rev. 10 (2007)
275–293.
[171] F.M. Talaat, Real-time facial emotion recognition system among children with
autism based on deep learning and IoT, Neural Comput. Appl. 35 (17) (2023)
12717–12728.
[172] L. Berkovits, A. Eisenhower, J. Blacher, Emotion regulation in young children
with autism spectrum disorders, J. Autism Dev. Disord. 47 (2017) 68–79.
[173] C. Ryan, C.N. Charragáin, Teaching emotion recognition skills to children with
autism, J. Autism Dev. Disord. 40 (12) (2010) 1505–1511.
[174] V. Blanes-Vidal, J. Bælum, E.S. Nadimi, P. Løfstrøm, L.P. Christensen, Chronic
exposure to odorous chemicals in residential areas and effects on human
psychosocial health: Dose–response relationships, Sci. Total Environ. 490
(2014) 545–554, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2014.05.041, URL https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0048969714007189.
[175] M.L. Cantuaria, J. Brandt, V. Blanes-Vidal, Exposure to multiple environmental
stressors, emotional and physical well-being, and self-rated health: An analysis
of relationships using latent variable structural equation modelling, Environ.
Res. 227 (2023) 115770, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2023.115770, URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0013935123005625.
[176] P. Weichbroth, W. Sroka, A note on the affective computing systems and
machines: A classification and appraisal, Procedia Comput. Sci. 207 (C) (2022)
3798–3807, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2022.09.441.
[177] D. Caruelle, P. Shams, A. Gustafsson, L. Lervik-Olsen, Affective computing
in marketing: practical implications and research opportunities afforded by
emotionally intelligent machines, Mark. Lett. 33 (1) (2022) 163–169.
[178] L. Cen, F. Wu, Z.L. Yu, F. Hu, Chapter 2 - A real-time speech emotion
recognition system and its application in online learning, in: S.Y. Tettegah, M.
Gartmeier (Eds.), Emotions, Technology, Design, and Learning, in: Emotions and
Technology, Academic Press, San Diego, 2016, pp. 27–46, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/B978-0-12-801856-9.00002-5, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/B9780128018569000025.
[179] M. Zembylas, M. Theodorou, A. Pavlakis, The role of emotions in the experience
of online learning: Challenges and opportunities, Educ. Media Int. 45 (2) (2008)
107–117.
[180] O.S. Lih, V. Jahmunah, E.E. Palmer, P.D. Barua, S. Dogan, T. Tuncer,
S. García, F. Molinari, U.R. Acharya, EpilepsyNet: Novel automated detection of epilepsy using transformer model with EEG signals from 121
patient population, Comput. Biol. Med. 164 (2023) 107312, http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2023.107312, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0010482523007771.
[181] F. Panahi, S. Rashidi, A. Sheikhani, Application of fractional Fourier transform in feature extraction from ELECTROCARDIOGRAM and GALVANIC SKIN
RESPONSE for emotion recognition,
Biomed.
Signal Process.
Control 69
(2021) 102863, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bspc.2021.102863, URL https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1746809421004602.
[182] H.W. Loh, C.P. Ooi, S.L. Oh, P.D. Barua, Y.R. Tan, F. Molinari, S. March,
U.R. Acharya, D.S.S. Fung, Deep neural network technique for automated
detection of ADHD and CD using ECG signal, Comput. Methods Programs
Biomed. 241 (2023) 107775, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cmpb.2023.107775,
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0169260723004418.
[183] O. Faust, W. Hong, H.W. Loh, S. Xu, R.-S. Tan, S. Chakraborty, P.D. Barua,
F. Molinari, U.R. Acharya, Heart rate variability for medical decision support
systems: A review, Comput. Biol. Med. 145 (2022) 105407.
[184] H.W. Loh, S. Xu, O. Faust, C.P. Ooi, P.D. Barua, S. Chakraborty, R.-S. Tan,
F. Molinari, U.R. Acharya, Application of photoplethysmography signals for
healthcare systems: An in-depth review, Comput. Methods Programs Biomed.
216 (2022) 106677.
[185] J. Zhou, G. Fang, N. Wu, Survey on security and privacy-preserving in federated
learning, J. Xihua Univ. (Nat. Sci. Ed.) 39 (4) (2020) 9–17.
[186] F. Liu, M. Li, X. Liu, T. Xue, J. Ren, C. Zhang, A review of federated metalearning and its application in cyberspace security, Electronics 12 (15) (2023)
3295.
[187] A. Noore, R. Singh, M. Vasta, Fusion, sensor-level, in: S.Z. Li, A. Jain (Eds.),
Encyclopedia of Biometrics, Springer US, Boston, MA, 2009, pp. 616–621,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-73003-5_156.
[188] A. Ross, Fusion, feature-level, in: S.Z. Li, A. Jain (Eds.), Encyclopedia of
Biometrics, Springer US, Boston, MA, 2009, pp. 597–602, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1007/978-0-387-73003-5_157.
[189] L. Osadciw, K. Veeramachaneni, Fusion, decision-level, in: S.Z. Li, A. Jain (Eds.),
Encyclopedia of Biometrics, Springer US, Boston, MA, 2009, pp. 593–597,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-73003-5_160.
[190] H.A. Ignatious, H. El-Sayed, P. Kulkarni, Multilevel data and decision fusion
using heterogeneous sensory data for autonomous vehicles, Remote Sens.
15 (9) (2023) http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/rs15092256, URL https://www.mdpi.
com/2072-4292/15/9/2256.
[191] Y. Cimtay, E. Ekmekcioglu, S. Caglar-Ozhan, Cross-subject multimodal emotion
recognition based on hybrid fusion, IEEE Access 8 (2020) 168865–168878,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3023871.
[192] Y. Tan, Z. Sun, F. Duan, J. Solé-Casals, C.F. Caiafa, A multimodal emotion
recognition method based on facial expressions and electroencephalography,
Biomed. Signal Process. Control 70 (2021) 103029, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.bspc.2021.103029, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1746809421006261.
[193] S.K. Khare, U.R. Acharya, Adazd-Net: Automated adaptive and explainable
Alzheimer’s disease detection system using EEG signals, Knowl.-Based Syst.
(2023) 110858, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2023.110858, URL https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0950705123006081.
[194] M. Abdar, F. Pourpanah, S. Hussain, D. Rezazadegan, L. Liu, M. Ghavamzadeh,
P. Fieguth, X. Cao, A. Khosravi, U.R. Acharya, et al., A review of uncertainty
quantification in deep learning: Techniques, applications and challenges, Inf.
Fusion 76 (2021) 243–297.
[195] R. Alizadehsani, M. Roshanzamir, S. Hussain, A. Khosravi, A. Koohestani, M.H.
Zangooei, M. Abdar, A. Beykikhoshk, A. Shoeibi, A. Zare, et al., Handling of
uncertainty in medical data using machine learning and probability theory
techniques: A review of 30 years (1991–2020), Ann. Oper. Res. (2021) 1–42.
[196] S. Seoni, V. Jahmunah, M. Salvi, P.D. Barua, F. Molinari, U.R. Acharya,
Application of uncertainty quantification to artificial intelligence in healthcare: A review of last decade (2013–2023), Comput. Biol. Med. (2023)
107441, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2023.107441, URL https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S001048252300906X.
[197] G. Dandy, W. Wu, A. Simpson, M. Leonard, A review of sources of uncertainty in optimization objectives of water distribution systems, Water 15 (1)
(2023) http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/w15010136, URL https://www.mdpi.com/
2073-4441/15/1/136.
[198] V. Jahmunah, E. Ng, R.-S. Tan, S.L. Oh, U.R. Acharya, Uncertainty quantification in DenseNet model using myocardial infarction ECG signals, Comput.
Methods Programs Biomed. 229 (2023) 107308.
[199] S. Taran, V. Bajaj, Emotion recognition from single-channel EEG signals using
a two-stage correlation and instantaneous frequency-based filtering method,
Comput. Methods Programs Biomed. 173 (2019) 157–165, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.cmpb.2019.03.015, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S016926071930118X.

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
[200] R. Jenke, A. Peer, M. Buss, Feature extraction and selection for emotion
recognition from EEG, IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput. 5 (3) (2014) 327–339,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2014.2339834.
[201] X. Li, D. Song, P. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Hou, B. Hu, Exploring EEG features in
cross-subject emotion recognition, Front. Neurosci. 12 (2018) http://dx.doi.org/
10.3389/fnins.2018.00162, URL https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/
fnins.2018.00162.
[202] H. Chao, L. Dong, Y. Liu, B. Lu, Emotion recognition from multiband
EEG signals using CapsNet, Sensors 19 (9) (2019) http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/
s19092212, URL https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/19/9/2212.
[203] X. Xing, Z. Li, T. Xu, L. Shu, B. Hu, X. Xu, SAE+LSTM: A new framework for emotion recognition from multi-channel EEG, Front. Neurorobot.
13
(2019)
http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fnbot.2019.00037,
URL
https://www.
frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnbot.2019.00037.
[204] T. Song, W. Zheng, P. Song, Z. Cui, EEG emotion recognition using dynamical
graph convolutional neural networks, IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput. 11 (3) (2020)
532–541, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2018.2817622.
[205] Y. Cimtay, E. Ekmekcioglu, Investigating the use of pretrained convolutional
neural network on cross-subject and cross-dataset EEG emotion recognition,
Sensors 20 (7) (2020) http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/s20072034, URL https://
www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/20/7/2034.
[206] P. Zhong, D. Wang, C. Miao, EEG-based emotion recognition using regularized
graph neural networks, IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput. 13 (3) (2022) 1290–1301,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2020.2994159.
[207] W.-L. Zheng, B.-L. Lu, Investigating critical frequency bands and channels
for EEG-based emotion recognition with deep neural networks, IEEE Trans.
Auton. Ment. Dev. 7 (3) (2015) 162–175, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TAMD.
2015.2431497.
[208] J.X. Chen, P.W. Zhang, Z.J. Mao, Y.F. Huang, D.M. Jiang, Y.N. Zhang, Accurate
EEG-based emotion recognition on combined features using deep convolutional
neural networks, IEEE Access 7 (2019) 44317–44328, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/ACCESS.2019.2908285.
[209] J. Cheng, M. Chen, C. Li, Y. Liu, R. Song, A. Liu, X. Chen, Emotion recognition
from multi-channel EEG via deep forest, IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inf. 25 (2)
(2021) 453–464, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JBHI.2020.2995767.
[210] W. Tao, C. Li, R. Song, J. Cheng, Y. Liu, F. Wan, X. Chen, EEG-based
emotion recognition via channel-wise attention and self attention, IEEE Trans.
Affect. Comput. 14 (1) (2023) 382–393, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.
2020.3025777.
[211] F. Yang, X. Zhao, W. Jiang, P. Gao, G. Liu, Multi-method fusion of cross-subject
emotion recognition based on high-dimensional EEG features, Front. Comput.
Neurosci. 13 (2019) http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fncom.2019.00053, URL https:
//www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fncom.2019.00053.
[212] Q. Gao, C.-h. Wang, Z. Wang, X.-l. Song, E.-z. Dong, Y. Song, EEG based emotion
recognition using fusion feature extraction method, Multimedia Tools Appl. 79
(2020) 27057–27074.
[213] Y. Peng, F. Qin, W. Kong, Y. Ge, F. Nie, A. Cichocki, GFIL: A unified framework
for the importance analysis of features, frequency bands, and channels in EEGbased emotion recognition, IEEE Trans. Cogn. Dev. Syst. 14 (3) (2022) 935–947,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TCDS.2021.3082803.
[214] R. Nawaz, K.H. Cheah, H. Nisar, V.V. Yap, Comparison of different feature
extraction methods for EEG-based emotion recognition, Biocybern. Biomed.
Eng. 40 (3) (2020) 910–926, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbe.2020.04.005, URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0208521620300553.
[215] A. Mert, A. Akan, Emotion recognition from EEG signals by using multivariate
empirical mode decomposition, Pattern Anal. Appl. 21 (2018) 81–89.
[216] J. Zhang, M. Chen, S. Zhao, S. Hu, Z. Shi, Y. Cao, ReliefF-based EEG sensor
selection methods for emotion recognition, Sensors 16 (10) (2016) http://dx.
doi.org/10.3390/s16101558, URL https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/16/10/
1558.
[217] D. Maheshwari, S. Ghosh, R. Tripathy, M. Sharma, U.R. Acharya, Automated
accurate emotion recognition system using rhythm-specific deep convolutional
neural network technique with multi-channel EEG signals, Comput. Biol. Med.
134
(2021)
104428,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.104428,
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0010482521002225.
[218] H. Uyanık, S.T.A. Ozcelik, Z.B. Duranay, A. Sengur, U.R. Acharya, Use
of differential entropy for automated emotion recognition in a virtual reality environment with EEG signals, Diagnostics 12 (10) (2022) http://
dx.doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics12102508, URL https://www.mdpi.com/2075-
4418/12/10/2508.
[219] M.B.H. Wiem, Z. Lachiri, Emotion classification in arousal valence model using
MAHNOB-HCI database, Int. J. Adv. Comput. Sci. Appl. 8 (3) (2017).
[220] Z. Wang, X. Zhou, W. Wang, C. Liang, Emotion recognition using multimodal
deep learning in multiple psychophysiological signals and video, Int. J. Mach.
Learn. Cybern. 11 (4) (2020) 923–934.
[221] D.B. Setyohadi, S. Kusrohmaniah, S.B. Gunawan, P. Pranowo, Galvanic skin
response data classification for emotion detection, Int. J. Electr. Comput. Eng.
(IJECE) 8 (5) (2018) 31–41.
[222] S. Dutta, B.K. Mishra, A. Mitra, A. Chakraborty, An analysis of emotion
recognition based on GSR signal, ECS Trans. 107 (1) (2022) 12535.
[223] J.Z. Lim, J. Mountstephens, J. Teo, Exploring pupil position as an eye-tracking
feature for four-class emotion classification in VR, J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 2129 (1)
(2021) 012069, http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/2129/1/012069.
[224] P. Tarnowski, M. Kołodziej, A. Majkowski, R. Rak, Eye-tracking analysis for
emotion recognition, Comput. Intell. Neurosci.
2020 (2020) 1–13, http://dx.
doi.org/10.1155/2020/2909267.
[225] Q. Wu, N. Dey, F. Shi, R.G. Crespo, R.S. Sherratt, Emotion classification on
eye-tracking and electroencephalograph fused signals employing deep gradient
neural networks, Appl. Soft Comput. 110 (2021) 107752, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.asoc.2021.107752, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1568494621006736.
[226] S. Demircan, H. Kahramanli Örnek, Feature extraction from speech data for
emotion recognition, J. Adv. Comput. Netw. 2 (2014) 28–30, http://dx.doi.
org/10.7763/JACN.2014.V2.76.
[227] L. Sun, B. Zou, S. Fu, J. Chen, F. Wang, Speech emotion recognition based on
DNN-decision tree SVM model, Speech Commun. 115 (2019) 29–37, http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.specom.2019.10.004,
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S016763931930127X.
[228] P. Krishnan, A.N. Joseph Raj, V. R, Emotion classification from speech signal
based on empirical mode decomposition and non-linear features, Complex Intell.
Syst. 7 (2021) 1919–1934, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s40747-021-00295-z.
[229] H.M. Fayek, M. Lech, L. Cavedon, Evaluating deep learning architectures
for speech emotion recognition, Neural Netw. 92 (2017) 60–68, http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2017.02.013, Advances in Cognitive Engineering Using Neural Networks. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S089360801730059X.
[230] D. Tanko, S. Dogan, F. Burak Demir, M. Baygin, S. Engin Sahin, T. Tuncer,
Shoelace pattern-based speech emotion recognition of the lecturers in distance
education: ShoePat23, Appl. Acoust. 190 (2022) 108637, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.apacoust.2022.108637, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0003682X22000111.
[231] Z.-T. Liu, M. Wu, W.-H. Cao, J.-W. Mao, J.-P. Xu, G.-Z. Tan, Speech emotion
recognition based on feature selection and extreme learning machine decision tree, Neurocomputing 273 (2018) 271–280, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.neucom.2017.07.050, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0925231217313565.
[232] T. Tuncer, S. Dogan, U.R. Acharya, Automated accurate speech emotion recognition system using twine shuffle pattern and iterative neighborhood component
analysis techniques, Knowl.-Based Syst. 211 (2021) 106547, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.knosys.2020.106547,
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0950705120306766.
[233] Z. ullah, L. Qi, D. Binu, B.R. Rajakumar, B. Mohammed Ismail, 2-D canonical
correlation analysis based image super-resolution scheme for facial emotion
recognition, Multimedia Tools Appl. 81 (10) (2022) 13911–13934, http://dx.
doi.org/10.1007/s11042-022-11922-3.
[234] H. Li, H. Xu, Deep reinforcement learning for robust emotional classification in
facial expression recognition, Knowl.-Based Syst. 204 (2020) 106172, http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2020.106172,
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0950705120304081.
[235] K. Chowdary, T. Nguyen, D. Hemanth, Deep learning-based facial emotion
recognition for human–computer interaction applications, Neural Comput. Appl.
(2021) 1–18, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00521-021-06012-8.
[236] D.K. Jain, P. Shamsolmoali, P. Sehdev, Extended deep neural network for
facial emotion recognition, Pattern Recognit. Lett. 120 (2019) 69–74, http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.patrec.2019.01.008, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S016786551930008X.
[237] F. Zhang, T. Zhang, Q. Mao, C. Xu, Geometry guided pose-invariant facial
expression recognition, IEEE Trans. Image Process. 29 (2020) 4445–4460,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TIP.2020.2972114.
[238] H. Zhang, A. Jolfaei, M. Alazab, A face emotion recognition method using
convolutional neural network and image edge computing, IEEE Access 7 (2019)
159081–159089, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2949741.
[239] N.D.
Mehendale,
Facial
emotion
recognition
using
convolutional
neural
networks (FERC), SN Appl. Sci. 2 (2020) 1–8.
[240] R. Kumar, S. Muniasamy, N. Arumugam, Facial emotion recognition using
subband selective multilevel stationary wavelet gradient transform and fuzzy
support vector machine, Vis. Comput. 37 (2021) 1–15, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1007/s00371-020-01988-1.
[241] Y.-D. Zhang, Z.-J. Yang, H.-M. Lu, X.-X. Zhou, P. Phillips, Q.-M. Liu, S.-H.
Wang, Facial emotion recognition based on biorthogonal wavelet entropy, fuzzy
support vector machine, and stratified cross validation, IEEE Access 4 (2016)
8375–8385, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2628407.
[242] K. Sarvakar, R. Senkamalavalli, S. Raghavendra, J. Santosh Kumar, R. Manjunath, S. Jaiswal, Facial emotion recognition using convolutional neural
networks, Mater. Today: Proc. 80 (2023) 3560–3564, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.matpr.2021.07.297, SI:5 NANO 2021. URL https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2214785321051567.
[243] S. Zhao, H. Yao, Y. Gao, R. Ji, G. Ding, Continuous probability distribution
prediction of image emotions via multitask shared sparse regression, IEEE
Trans. Multimed. 19 (3) (2017) 632–645, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TMM.
2016.2617741.

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
[244] S. Katsigiannis, N. Ramzan, DREAMER: A database for emotion recognition
through EEG and ECG signals from wireless low-cost off-the-shelf devices, IEEE
J. Biomed. Health Inf. 22 (1) (2018) 98–107, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JBHI.
2017.2688239.
[245] R.-N. Duan, J.-Y. Zhu, B.-L. Lu, Differential entropy feature for EEG-based
emotion classification, in: 6th International IEEE/EMBS Conference on Neural
Engineering (NER), IEEE, 2013, pp. 81–84.
[246] S.
Sangnark,
P.
Autthasan,
P.
Ponglertnapakorn,
P.
Chalekarn,
T.
Sudhawiyangkul, M. Trakulruangroj, S. Songsermsawad, R. Assabumrungrat, S.
Amplod, K. Ounjai, T. Wilaiprasitporn, Revealing preference in popular music
through familiarity and brain response, IEEE Sens. J. (2021) 1.
[247] S. Koelstra, C. Muhl, M. Soleymani, J.-S. Lee, A. Yazdani, T. Ebrahimi, T. Pun,
A. Nijholt, I. Patras, DEAP: A database for emotion analysis using physiological
signals, IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput. 3 (1) (2012) 18–31, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/T-AFFC.2011.15.
[248] P. Lakhan, N. Banluesombatkul, V. Changniam, R. Dhithijaiyratn, P. Leelaarporn, E. Boonchieng, S. Hompoonsup, T. Wilaiprasitporn, Consumer grade brain
sensing for emotion recognition, IEEE Sens. J. 19 (21) (2019) 9896–9907,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2019.2928781.
[249] E. Ekmekcioglu, Y. Cimtay, Loughborough university multimodal emotion
dataset-2,
2021,
http://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.12644033.v5,
URL
https://figshare.com/articles/dataset/Loughborough_University_Multimodal_
Emotion_Dataset_-_2/12644033.
[250] W. Zheng, W. Liu, Y. Lu, B. Lu, A. Cichocki, EmotionMeter: A multimodal
framework for recognizing human emotions, IEEE Trans. Cybern. (2018) 1–13,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TCYB.2018.2797176.
[251] M. Soleymani, J. Lichtenauer, T. Pun, M. Pantic, A multimodal database for
affect recognition and implicit tagging, IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput. 3 (1) (2012)
42–55, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/T-AFFC.2011.25.
[252] G. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Y. Ge, Y. Zheng, X. Sun, K. Zhang, Asymmetric hemisphere
activation in tenderness: evidence from EEG signals, Sci. Rep. 8 (1) (2018)
8029.
[253] G. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Y. Ge, Frontal EEG asymmetry and middle line power
difference in discrete emotions, Front. Behav. Neurosci. 12 (2018) 225.
[254] J.A. Miranda-Correa, M.K. Abadi, N. Sebe, I. Patras, AMIGOS: A dataset for
affect, personality and mood research on individuals and groups, IEEE Trans.
Affect. Comput. 12 (2) (2021) 479–493, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.
2018.2884461.
[255] T.B. Alakus, M. Gonen, I. Turkoglu, Database for an emotion recognition
system based on EEG signals and various computer games - GAMEEMO,
Biomed. Signal Process. Control 60 (2020) 101951, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.bspc.2020.101951, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1746809420301075.
[256] T. Song, W. Zheng, C. Lu, Y. Zong, X. Zhang, Z. Cui, MPED: A multi-modal
physiological emotion database for discrete emotion recognition, IEEE Access 7
(2019) 12177–12191, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2891579.
[257] R. Subramanian, J. Wache, M.K. Abadi, R.L. Vieriu, S. Winkler, N. Sebe,
ASCERTAIN: emotion and personality recognition using commercial sensors,
IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput. 9 (2) (2018) 147–160, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
TAFFC.2016.2625250.
[258] A. Baghdadi, Y. Aribi, R. Fourati, N. Halouani, P. Siarry, A.M. Alimi, DASPS:
A database for anxious states based on a psychological stimulation, 2019,
arXiv:1901.02942.
[259] M. Yu, S. Xiao, M. Hua, H. Wang, X. Chen, F. Tian, Y. Li, EEG-based emotion
recognition in an immersive virtual reality environment: From local activity
to brain network features, Biomed. Signal Process. Control 72 (2022) 103349,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bspc.2021.103349, URL https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1746809421009460.
[260] R. Ivanov, F. Kazantsev, E. Zavarzin, A. Klimenko, N. Milakhina, Y.G. Matushkin, A. Savostyanov, S. Lashin, ICBrainDB.: an integrated database for
finding associations between genetic factors and EEG markers of depressive
disorders, J. Pers. Med. 12 (1) (2022) 53.
[261] J. Wagner, J. Kim, E. Andre, From physiological signals to emotions: Implementing and comparing selected methods for feature extraction and classification,
in: 2005 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo, 2005, pp.
940–943, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICME.2005.1521579.
[262] P. Schmidt, A. Reiss, R. Duerichen, C. Marberger, K. Van Laerhoven, Introducing
WESAD, a multimodal dataset for wearable stress and affect detection, in: Proceedings of the 20th ACM International Conference on Multimodal Interaction,
ICMI ’18, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2018, pp.
400–408, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3242969.3242985.
[263] L. Zhang, S. Walter, X. Ma, P. Werner, A. Al-Hamadi, H.C. Traue, S.
Gruss,
‘‘BioVid
Emo
DB’’:
A
multimodal
database
for
emotion
analyses
validated by subjective ratings, in: 2016 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI), 2016, pp. 1–6, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/SSCI.2016.
7849931.
[264] S. Koldijk, M. Sappelli, S. Verberne, M.A. Neerincx, W. Kraaij, The SWELL
knowledge work dataset for stress and user modeling research, in: Proceedings
of the 16th International Conference on Multimodal Interaction, ICMI ’14,
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2014, pp. 291–298,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2663204.2663257.
[265] J.-H. Maeng, D.-H. Kang, D.-H. Kim, Deep learning method for selecting
effective models and feature groups in emotion recognition using an Asian
multimodal database, Electronics 9 (12) (2020) http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/
electronics9121988, URL https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/9/12/1988.
[266] S.R. Livingstone, F.A. Russo, The Ryerson Audio-Visual Database of Emotional
Speech and Song (RAVDESS): A dynamic, multimodal set of facial and vocal
expressions in North American English, PLOS ONE 13 (5) (2018) 1–35, http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196391.
[267] E. Chen, Z. Lu, H. Xu, L. Cao, Y. Zhang, J. Fan, A large scale speech sentiment
corpus, in: Proceedings of the Twelfth Language Resources and Evaluation
Conference, European Language Resources Association, Marseille, France, 2020,
pp. 6549–6555, URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.lrec-1.806.
[268] C. Busso, M. Bulut, C.-C. Lee, A. Kazemzadeh, E. Mower, S. Kim, J.N. Chang,
S. Lee, S.S. Narayanan, IEMOCAP: Interactive emotional dyadic motion capture
database, Lang. Resour. Eval. 42 (2008) 335–359.
[269] F. Burkhardt, A. Paeschke, M. Rolfes, W.F. Sendlmeier, B. Weiss, et al., A
database of German emotional speech, in: Interspeech, Vol. 5, 2005, pp.
1517–1520.
[270] A. Dhall, R. Goecke, S. Lucey, T. Gedeon, Collecting large, richly annotated
facial-expression databases from movies, IEEE MultiMedia 19 (3) (2012) 34–41,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MMUL.2012.26.
[271] W. Bao, Y. Li, M. Gu, M. Yang, H. Li, L. Chao, J. Tao, Building a Chinese
natural emotional audio-visual database, in: 2014 12th International Conference
on Signal Processing (ICSP), 2014, pp. 583–587, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
ICOSP.2014.7015071.
[272] K. Wang, Q. Zhang, S. Liao, A database of elderly emotional speech, in: Proc.
Int. Symp. Signal Process. Biomed. Eng Informat, 2014, pp. 549–553.
[273] S.G. Koolagudi, R. Reddy, J. Yadav, K.S. Rao, IITKGP-SEHSC : Hindi speech
corpus for emotion analysis, in: 2011 International Conference on Devices
and Communications (ICDeCom), 2011, pp. 1–5, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
ICDECOM.2011.5738540.
[274] O. Martin, I. Kotsia, B. Macq, I. Pitas, The eNTERFACE’ 05 audio-visual emotion
database, in: 22nd International Conference on Data Engineering Workshops
(ICDEW’06), 2006, p. 8, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICDEW.2006.145.
[275] T. Bänziger, M. Mortillaro, K.R. Scherer, Introducing the Geneva Multimodal
expression corpus for experimental research on emotion perception, Emotion
12 (5) (2012) 1161.
[276] S. Haq, P. Jackson, Speaker-dependent audio-visual emotion recognition, in:
Proc. Int. Conf. on Auditory-Visual Speech Processing (AVSP’08), Norwich, UK,
2009.
[277] S. Haq, P. Jackson, in: W. Wang (Ed.), Machine Audition: Principles, Algorithms
and Systems, IGI Global, Hershey PA, 2010, pp. 398–423, Ch. Multimodal
Emotion Recognition.
[278] S. Haq, P. Jackson, J. Edge, Audio-visual feature selection and reduction for
emotion classification, in: Proc. Int. Conf. on Auditory-Visual Speech Processing
(AVSP’08), Tangalooma, Australia, 2008.
[279] A. Batliner, S. Steidl, E. Nöth, Releasing a thoroughly annotated and processed
spontaneous emotional database: the FAU Aibo Emotion Corpus, 2008.
[280] M.K. Pichora-Fuller, K. Dupuis, Toronto emotional speech set (TESS), 2020,
http://dx.doi.org/10.5683/SP2/E8H2MF.
[281] S. Zhalehpour, O. Onder, Z. Akhtar, C.E. Erdem, BAUM-1: A spontaneous audiovisual face database of affective and mental states, IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput.
8 (3) (2017) 300–313, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2016.2553038.
[282] Y. Wang, L. Guan, Recognizing human emotional state from audiovisual signals,
IEEE Trans. Multimed. 10 (5) (2008) 936–946, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
TMM.2008.927665.
[283] G. Costantini, I. Iaderola, A. Paoloni, M. Todisco, EMOVO corpus: an Italian
emotional speech database, in: Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’14), European Language
Resources Association (ELRA), Reykjavik, Iceland, 2014, pp. 3501–3504, URL
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2014/pdf/591_Paper.pdf.
[284] D. Lundqvist, A. Flykt, A. Öhman, Karolinska directed emotional faces, Cogn.
Emot. (1998).
[285] P. Lucey, J.F. Cohn, T. Kanade, J. Saragih, Z. Ambadar, I. Matthews, The
Extended Cohn-Kanade Dataset (CK+): A complete dataset for action unit and
emotion-specified expression, in: 2010 IEEE Computer Society Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition - Workshops, 2010, pp. 94–101,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CVPRW.2010.5543262.
[286] M. Lyons, S. Akamatsu, M. Kamachi, J. Gyoba, Coding facial expressions
with Gabor wavelets, in: Proceedings Third IEEE International Conference on
Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition, 1998, pp. 200–205, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/AFGR.1998.670949.
[287] R. Gross, I. Matthews, J. Cohn, T. Kanade, S. Baker, Multi-PIE, in: 2008 8th
IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face & Gesture Recognition, 2008,
pp. 1–8, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/AFGR.2008.4813399.
[288] R. Gross, I. Matthews, J. Cohn, T. Kanade, S. Baker, Multi-PIE, Image Vis.
Comput. 28 (5) (2010) 807–813, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.imavis.2009.08.
002, Best of Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition 2008. URL https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0262885609001711.

,QIRUPDWLRQ )XVLRQ 

 


S.K. Khare et al.
[289] A. Mollahosseini, B. Hasani, M.H. Mahoor, AffectNet: A database for facial
expression, valence, and arousal computing in the wild, IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput. 10 (1) (2019) 18–31, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2017.
2740923.
[290] I.J. Goodfellow, D. Erhan, P.L. Carrier, A. Courville, M. Mirza, B. Hamner, W.
Cukierski, Y. Tang, D. Thaler, D.-H. Lee, et al., Challenges in representation
learning: A report on three machine learning contests, in: Neural Information Processing: 20th International Conference, ICONIP 2013, Daegu, Korea,
November 3-7, 2013. Proceedings, Part III 20, Springer, 2013, pp. 117–124.
[291] M. Pantic, M. Valstar, R. Rademaker, L. Maat, Web-based database for facial
expression analysis, in: 2005 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and
Expo, 2005, p. 5, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICME.2005.1521424.
[292] S. Li, W. Deng, J. Du, Reliable crowdsourcing and deep locality-preserving
learning for expression recognition in the wild, in: 2017 IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), IEEE, 2017, pp. 2584–2593.
[293] S. Li, W. Deng, Reliable crowdsourcing and deep locality-preserving learning
for unconstrained facial expression recognition, IEEE Trans. Image Process. 28
(1) (2019) 356–370.
[294] Z. Zhang, P. Luo, C.C. Loy, X. Tang, From facial expression recognition to
interpersonal relation prediction, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 126 (2018) 550–569.
[295] N. Aifanti, C. Papachristou, A. Delopoulos, The MUG facial expression database,
in: 11th International Workshop on Image Analysis for Multimedia Interactive
Services WIAMIS 10, 2010, pp. 1–4.
[296] D. Aneja, A. Colburn, G. Faigin, L. Shapiro, B. Mones, Modeling stylized
character expressions via deep learning, in: Computer Vision–ACCV 2016: 13th
Asian Conference on Computer Vision, Taipei, Taiwan, November 20-24, 2016,
Revised Selected Papers, Part II 13, Springer, 2017, pp. 136–153.
[297] A. Dhall, R. Goecke, S. Lucey, T. Gedeon, Static facial expression analysis in
tough conditions: Data, evaluation protocol and benchmark, in: 2011 IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision Workshops (ICCV Workshops),
2011, pp. 2106–2112, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICCVW.2011.6130508.
[298] L. Yin, X. Wei, Y. Sun, J. Wang, M. Rosato, A 3D facial expression database for
facial behavior research, in: 7th International Conference on Automatic Face
and Gesture Recognition (FGR06), 2006, pp. 211–216, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/FGR.2006.6.
[299] G.B. Huang, M. Mattar, T. Berg, E. Learned-Miller, Labeled faces in the wild:
A database forstudying face recognition in unconstrained environments, in:
Workshop on Faces in’Real-Life’Images: Detection, Alignment, and Recognition,
2008.
[300] G. Zhao, X. Huang, M. Taini, S.Z. Li, M. Pietikäinen, Facial expression
recognition from near-infrared videos, Image Vis. Comput. 29 (9) (2011)
607–619, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.imavis.2011.07.002, URL https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0262885611000515.
[301] C.I. Watson, NIST special database 18. NIST Mugshot Identification Database
(MID), 2008.
[302] F. Wallhoff, B. Schuller, M. Hawellek, G. Rigoll, Efficient recognition of
authentic dynamic facial expressions on the feedtum database, in: 2006 IEEE
International Conference on Multimedia and Expo, 2006, pp. 493–496, http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICME.2006.262433.
[303] Q. You, J. Luo, H. Jin, J. Yang, Building a large scale dataset for image emotion
recognition: The fine print and the benchmark, in: Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 30, 2016.
[304] O. Langner, R. Dotsch, G. Bijlstra, D.H. Wigboldus, S.T. Hawk, A. Van Knippenberg, Presentation and validation of the Radboud Faces Database, Cogn. Emot.
24 (8) (2010) 1377–1388.
[305] P. Lucey, J.F. Cohn, K.M. Prkachin, P.E. Solomon, I. Matthews, Painful data:
The UNBC-McMaster shoulder pain expression archive database, in: 2011 IEEE
International Conference on Automatic Face & Gesture Recognition (FG), 2011,
pp. 57–64, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/FG.2011.5771462.
