Gamified AI Approch for Early Detection of Dementia
1Paramita Kundu Maji*, 2Soubhik Acharya, 3Priti Paul, 4Sanjay Chakraborty*,
5Saikat Basu
1234Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Techno International
New Town, Kolkata, India
4Department of Computer and Information Science, Linkoping University,
Sweden
5Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Maulana Abul Kalam Azad
University, Kolkata, India
Email: paramita.kundu.maji@tint.edu.in*, schakraborty770@gmail.com*
Abstract: This paper aims to develop a new deep learning-inspired gaming
approach for early detection of dementia. This research integrates a robust convolutional neural network (CNN)-based model for early dementia detection using
health metrics data as well as facial image data through a cognitive assessmentbased gaming application. We have collected 1000 data samples of health metrics
dataset from Apollo diagnostic center Kolkata that is labeled as either “demented”
or “non-demented” for the training of MOD-1D-CNN for the game level 1 and
another dataset of facial images containing 1800 facial data that are labeled as
either “demented” or “non-demented” is collected by our research team for the
training of MOD-2D-CNN model in-game level 2. In our work, the loss for the
proposed MOD-1D-CNN model is 0.2692 and the highest accuracy is 70.50%
for identifying the dementia traits using real-life health metrics data. Similarly,
the proposed MOD-2D-CNN model loss is 0.1755 and the highest accuracy is
obtained here 95.72% for recognizing the dementia status using real-life face-based
image data. Therefore, a rule-based weightage method is applied to combine
both the proposed methods to achieve the final decision. The MOD-1D-CNN
and MOD-2D-CNN models are more lightweight and computationally efficient
alternatives because they have a significantly lower number of parameters when
compared to the other state-of-the-art models. We have compared their accuracies
and parameters with the other state-of-the-art deep learning models.
Keywords: Cognitive assessment, Dementia detection, Deep learning, Convolutional neural networks, Game playing.
1. INTRODUCTION
A major threat to public health in a period of global population aging is the
development of dementia. Effective intervention and treatment require early
diagnosis of cognitive impairment. Accessibility and involvement are typically
lacking in traditional diagnostic techniques [1-3]. This work presents a novel
method for identifying early dementia that draws inspiration from gamified
cognitive evaluation and deep learning concepts [4-6]. Through the use of a
two-tiered memory card matching game, users—demented or not—participate
in a dynamic evaluation. If users complete the first level within the allotted
1
arXiv:2405.16538v1  [cs.CV]  26 May 2024

click threshold and time frame, they can go to the second level; if not, they are
prompted to provide pertinent health parameters and facial image data. Once the
first level has been completed successfully, users are successfully redirected to the
second level. If both levels are completed successfully, a message congratulating
them on moving through the cognitive assessment levels appears. If users cannot
complete the first level of prediction within the designated click threshold and
time limit, they are prompted to provide vital health indicators, including age,
weight, heart rate, blood oxygen levels, body temperature, weight, and diabetes
status, to aid with the first level of prediction. After providing these details,
gamers are granted an additional opportunity to go to the second level. Users
who do not meet the click threshold on the second level are prompted to capture
an image of their face during gameplay. A deep-learning model then examines
this image to look for signs of dementia. The user is presented with definitive
results at the end of this interactive process, which has reshaped the field of
early dementia diagnosis by combining artificial intelligence, health parameter
input, and game-based involvement.
By developing a gamified cognitive evaluation tool based on deep learning
principles, this research aims to tackle the urgent problem of early dementia
identification. The main issue is the low interest and accessibility of conventional
diagnostic techniques, which calls for a new strategy that seamlessly combines
health parameter input, face picture analysis, and a two-tiered memory card
matching game. The main research question that motivates this investigation is
whether this novel approach—which combines artificial intelligence and gamebased interaction—can offer a practical and efficient way to detect cognitive
decline in its early stages, thereby enhancing intervention tactics and the care
given to those who are at risk of dementia. This work aims to determine the
effectiveness of a gamified cognitive assessment system in the early detection
of dementia by using a two-tiered memory card-matching game. Additionally,
the accuracy and reliability of the deep learning model in predicting dementia
based on user-provided health parameters and facial images will be assessed.
The work’s central premise is that combining a dynamic gaming framework with
deep learning-based facial image analysis and health parameter input would
result in a reliable and approachable way to spot cognitive impairment early on.
By achieving these goals, this research hopes to provide insightful information
on how cutting-edge technology might transform current approaches to early
dementia detection.
There is some interesting literature available in this domain. The literature on
dementia detection highlights the critical need for early identification, given
the limitations of traditional diagnostic approaches regarding accessibility and
engagement. Notable studies explore various innovative methodologies, such
as Kherchouche et al. [7] Deep Learning framework for early Alzheimer’s disease detection using Proton Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (1H-MRS) data,
emphasizing concerns about data limitations and interpretability. Alex et al.
[8] propose a cost-effective and non-invasive approach for early AD detection
using speech data, acknowledging challenges in dataset diversity and model
2

interpretability. Qayyum et al. [9] employ EEG data analysis to discern resting
and cognitive states, achieving notable achievements but recognizing limitations
in sample size and model interpretability. Gamification emerges as a promising
avenue, with Paliokas et al. [10] introducing a gamified social platform for
dementia care, acknowledging challenges in accessibility and generalizability.
Zhang and Chignell [11] explore cognitive assessment games for people with
dementia, addressing concerns about generalizability and ethical considerations.
Chi et al. [12] introduce the “Smart Thinker” game suite, showing cognitive
improvement but recognizing limitations in study duration and sample size.
Mora et al. [13] The PNH tool targets cognitive training, addressing challenges
in generalizability and ethical user privacy practices. Technological interventions
include Paletta et al. [14] PLAYTIME app, combining eye movement analysis
and cognitive exercises, with concerns about varying efficacy and the need for
clinical validation. Aram et al. [15] introduce a 2-layer model for early detection
of dementia problems, emphasizing the need for ethical considerations and diverse
dataset validation. Shankle et al. [16] differentiate between normal aging and
early dementia using machine learning, highlighting the importance of addressing
dataset specificity. Bidani et al. [17] present a Deep Learning approach for
dementia detection using MRI scans, facing challenges in dataset homogeneity
and model interpretability. Murugan et al. [18] DEMNET framework achieves remarkable accuracy but lacks extensive discussion on interpretability and broader
dataset validation. Table 1 presents concise and intriguing research gaps drawn
from existing literature that have served as inspiration for our current work.
Table 1: Research gaps in some key literature works
Key Literature
Works
Research Gaps
[7]
The major research need is for more potent early
detection techniques for Alzheimer’s disease (AD) that
use data from proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy
(1H-MRS) to identify biological alterations in the
brain before the onset of structural atrophy.
[8]
The research gap is the need for more investigation
and development of robust and explainable
multimodal fusion approaches for speech-based
automated detection of Alzheimer’s disease (AD),
taking into account issues with reliability, data size,
and model explainability.
[9]
The area of unmet research need is the investigation
of deep learning methods, specifically 1D
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), for precise
classification and evaluation of cognitive load from
EEG data. Specifically, the study should concentrate
on the consistent pattern of alpha brain waves in
differentiating between resting and cognitive states.
3

Key Literature
Works
Research Gaps
[10]
The area of unmet research need is the need for more
investigation and the creation of gamification systems
specifically designed for dementia patients and their
carers in social networking settings.
[11]
The area of unmet research need is the creation of a
thorough framework for the efficient use of cognitive
assessment games made especially for dementia
patients.
[12]
The research gap lies in the area of computerized
serious games, such as “Smart Thinker”, that target
memory and attention abilities in older persons to
improve cognitive functioning. This is especially
important when it comes to managing and preventing
dementia.
[13]
The research gap concerns the need for novel and
compelling techniques to improve long-term adherence
and the efficacy of personalized cognitive impairment
prevention treatments in older persons. Examples of
such initiatives include gamified
crowdsourcing-inspired programs like Preventive
Neuro Health (PNH).
[14]
The research gap is the lack of longitudinal data on
changing mental processes in dementia, which makes
it difficult to provide personalized therapy and
prolonged freedom at home.
[15]
The research gap relates to the requirement for
machine learning-based early diagnosis models for
dementia that are both effective and efficient. These
models can alleviate the load on patients and
healthcare systems by streamlining diagnostic
procedures.
[16]
The research gap relates to the need for machine
learning techniques that can use extensive datasets to
discern between early symptoms of dementia and
normal brain aging, perhaps offering more accessible
and accurate diagnostic tools than previous methods.
[17]
The research gap is to meet the demand for better
diagnostic instruments in the evaluation of
neurodegenerative diseases, a novel method utilizing
Deep Convolutional Neural Network (DCNN) and
Transfer Learning models has been developed to
reliably identify and categorize dementia using MRI
brain images.
4

Key Literature
Works
Research Gaps
[18]
The research gap is the need for better Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) models-based diagnostic
processes for Alzheimer’s Disease (AD), which address
class imbalance and increase sensitivity and precision
in MRI image recognition.
This work adds substantially to the corpus of information by addressing the urgent
need for novel and approachable techniques in the early identification of dementia.
To create a practical and efficient method for detecting cognitive decline early on,
we consider implementing a gamified cognitive evaluation system. This system
can help assess cognitive function and identify potential signs of decline. By
gamifying the evaluation process, we can engage users and make the assessment
more enjoyable, increasing their willingness to participate.The scope comprises
developing a two-level memory game that combines gaming, deep learning
models, face image analysis, and health parameter input for an all-encompassing
cognitive evaluation. The work does, however, have many drawbacks, such as
a limited sample size, potential biases related to user participation in gamified
environments, and the requirement for additional validation in a variety of
demographics. Individual variances in user behavior can impact the results and
might not fully represent the range of characteristics associated with dementia.
The methodology includes developing and implementing a gamified cognitive
evaluation system, using deep learning algorithms to detect dementia, and using
a quantitative approach to examine user performance data. Important elements
of the procedure include data validation, model accuracy evaluation, and analysis
of user input to improve the system’s dependability and user-friendliness. In the
end, our research aims to transform methods for detecting dementia, encouraging
early intervention, and enhancing patient outcomes in the context of proactive
dementia care.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives a detailed description
of the proposed methodology. In section 2, the different levels of the proposed
game, MOD-1D-CNN and MOD-2D-CNN algorithms & their architectures are
explained. An experimental setup, feature extraction, and mapping strategies
are provided in section 3. The result analysis and discussion along with a brief
comparison is given in Section 4. Section 5 discusses the conclusions of the work.
2. PROPOSED METHODOLOGY
2.1 Levels of Proposed Game
Cognitive talents comprise a wide range of human abilities, including psychomotor, olfactory, tactile, visual processing, reasoning, reading, writing, and others
[19]. Executive Functions (EFs) are cognitive processes that exert influence
over other abilities and regulate their functioning [20]. Disruptions in cognitive
5

processes can result in the development of social and mental health issues [21].
Cognitive assessment is a valuable tool for evaluating cognitive impairment,
which refers to a lack of knowledge, cognitive functioning, or sound judgment.
To perform cognitive assessments, a variety of popular techniques are used.Each
assessment is meticulously designed to assess specific neuropsychological domains,
including memory, language, executive function, abstract reasoning, attention,
and visuospatial skills [22]. This innovative cognitive assessment game measures
critical cognitive abilities such as memory, decision-making, and flexibility, which
are essential for the early identification of dementia. It has two levels to evaluate
various cognitive abilities and is created with a hypertext markup language
(HTML), cascading style sheets (CSS), and JavaScript. The game provides a
sophisticated diagnostic experience, ranging from the “Basic Match” level, which
evaluates memory retention, to the “Ultimate Test,” which evaluates adaptability
and strategic thinking [23-24]. This ground-breaking tool goes beyond traditional
gaming by providing a sophisticated diagnostic method and possibly identifying
early cognitive deviations through technology-driven assessments. In line with
the overall goals of the research, the proposed Level 1 of the “Basic Match” game
is intended to serve as a fundamental cognitive evaluation instrument. This
grid-layout game with face-down cards that hold concealed images is created
with hypertext markup language (HTML), Cascading Style Sheets (CSS), and
JavaScript. JavaScript logic is in charge of controlling key operations like card
flipping, pair matching detection, and game progression. Using fundamental
JavaScript methods for element selection, sound setup, card order randomization,
and memory retention countdown, the Level 1 structure follows card-matching
guidelines. Card faces are momentarily revealed and hidden as users begin the
game by using the ‘clicking()’ method. Select cards can be flipped concurrently
by users using the ‘enableClick()’ method, and a pair detection algorithm is
used by the ‘match()’ function. Potential user challenges are addressed with an
inventive feature. The game will automatically forward players to the next page
for cognitive prediction or assessment if their clicks have crossed the limits of the
number of click counts, which is the click threshold. Using window.location.href,
a JavaScript listener initiates a redirection function and keeps track of the number of clicks. An on-screen notification informing that you have beyond the click
threshold ends the game along with the redirection. Before the user reaches the
prediction page, a confirmation popup makes sure they have acknowledged it.
The prediction page functions as a thorough platform, gathering essential input
data for 1D Convolution Neural Network (CNN)-based dementia prediction.
Users provide details about their body temperature, heart rate, weight, age,
diabetes, and blood oxygen level. Using the algorithms of 1D Convolution Neural
Network (CNN) to produce predicted insights about cognitive health and possible
early indicators of dementia, this data powers an assessment methodology. After
the inputs are validated by the model they are again redirected to play the next
level of the game which is the Ultimate test for the cognitive assessment. In
Level 1, the click threshold is set at 36, the countdown timer is 2 minutes, and
the show timer for remembering card positions is 5 seconds. The forecasts are in
line with fundamental ideas that highlight memory, judgment, and flexibility as
6

critical components of early dementia identification. The suggested cognitive
evaluation approach is made more useful overall by this smooth transition from
gameplay to cognitive assessment in the Level 1 setting. The proposed game
level 1 is shown in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1 Basic Match Level 1 of the Proposed Gaming Web Application
The cognitive evaluation game’s Level 2 of the “Ultimate Test” is designed to
provide players with a more challenging experience, introducing a variety of
cognitive activities, including grid control, rotations, swaps, and bomb interactions [23-24]. The HTML structure maintains familiarity while enhancing
user engagement through the addition of interactive buttons and a header area.
JavaScript scripts ensure dynamic shuffling of the grid at the beginning of each
game, creating a randomized card layout. To add a layer of complexity, a
countdown timer is implemented, offering a brief memorization period for players.
Clicking on dynamically rotating grid pieces allows players to match pairs of
cards, with the requirement to complete all matches within a specified click
count for a predetermined score. Players who complete the level within the given
click threshold and countdown timer receive acknowledgment through a message,
indicating that they have successfully passed the cognitive assessment and show
no signs of dementia. However, for those unable to finish within the allotted click
count, the game seamlessly transitions to a facial image capture prompt. Players
are instructed to take a picture of their faces, initiating a 2D convolutional
neural network (CNN) analysis. The click threshold counter and countdown
timer emphasize precision and time sensitivity, ensuring a challenging cognitive
experience. The facial image analysis aims to predict whether the player exhibits
dementia-like symptoms, providing valuable insights into cognitive health based
on facial traits. This comprehensive approach combines gameplay elements, data
input, and facial image analysis to offer users a thorough cognitive assessment
system. The proposed game level 2 is shown in Fig. 2.
7

Fig. 2 Ultimate Test Level 2 of the Proposed Gaming Web Application
2.2 Proposed Gaming Strategy
The procedural overview of the memory game with an integrated dementia
predictor is shown below, which incorporates interactive features, predictive
modeling, and facial image analysis to create a comprehensive cognitive evaluation
system. The proposed algorithm for the level 1 game is shown below:
ALGORITHM-1: LEVEL – 1: BASIC MATCH GAME
Input: Game Level
Output: -User interactions with face-down cards.
- Completion of the game.
-User input for cognitive prediction (body temperature, heart rate, weight,
age, diabetes, blood oxygen level).
-Prediction result using Mod 1D CNN.
-Validation feedback for user inputs.
Procedure:
Begin:
Initialize game components: setUpGame()
Start game: startGame()
Set level-specific parameters:
clickThreshold = 36
timerDuration = 2 minutes
showTimerDuration = 5 seconds
Show timer for memorization:
showTimer(showTimerDuration)
while(gameInProgress() and
withinTimeLimit(timerDuration)) do
// User interaction loop with timer
Allow user to flip cards: handleCardFlipping()
if foundMatch() then // Check for completed matches
8

ALGORITHM-1: LEVEL – 1: BASIC MATCH GAME
handleMatchedPair()
end if
if exceedClickThreshold(clickThreshold) then //
Check for click threshold
initiateCognitivePrediction()
displayConfirmationPopup()
exitGameLoop()
end if
end while
Collect user input for prediction: collectUserInput()
Use Mod 1D CNN for cognitive prediction:
use1DCNNForCognitivePrediction()
if inputsValidated() then // Validate prediction inputs
redirectToLevel2()
else
displayFeedback()
end if
end
The proposed algorithm for the level 2 game is shown below:
ALGORITHM-2: LEVEL – 2: ULTIMATE TEST GAME
Input: Game Level
Output: - User interactions with a dynamically shuffled grid.
- Completion of the Ultimate Test.
- Facial image capture prompt.
- Facial image for analysis using Mod 2D CNN.
- Result feedback based on Mod 2D CNN analysis.
Procedure:
Begin:
Enhance game elements: enhanceGame()
Dynamically shuffle grid: shuffleGrid()
Start the Ultimate Test: startUltimateTest()
Set level-specific parameters:
clickThreshold = 70
timerDuration = 5 minutes
showTimerDuration =10 seconds
Show timer for memorization:
showTimer(showTimerDuration)
while countdownInProgress(timerDuration) do //
Countdown timer loop
9

ALGORITHM-2: LEVEL – 2: ULTIMATE TEST GAME
Allow user to interact with the grid:
handleGridInteraction()
if allMatchesCompleted() then // Check for
completed matches
displayAcknowledgment()
exitCountdownLoop()
end if
if exceedClickThreshold(clickThreshold) then //
Check for click threshold
initiateFacialImageCapture()
captureFacialImage()
analyzeFacialImageWith2DCNN() // Analyze
facial image using Mod-2D-CNN
displayResultFeedback() // Display result feedback
based on Mod-2D-CNN analysis
exitCountdownLoop()
end if
end while
end
2.3 Proposed Model
2.3.1 Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are a crucial subset of deep learning,
enhancing the analysis of images and videos. They excel at recognizing spatial
patterns within visual data and performing hierarchical feature extraction, from
basic edge detection to complex textures and object components [25-26]. CNNs
use convolutional layers with filters and kernels to scan through input images or
feature maps, identifying spatial patterns [27]. The multi-layered architecture
of CNNs enables a hierarchical learning process, progressively building upon
previously extracted features and improving accuracy in tasks like classification
and object detection [28]. In this work, we have proposed a modified CNN (MOD-
CNN) algorithm for dementia prediction tasks. This MOD-CNN is divided into
two phases.
1. MOD-1D-CNN is working on the first phase of the game.
2. MOD-2D-CNN is working on the second phase of the game.
2.3.2 MOD-1D-CNN in Game level-1 for Health Dataset
The one-dimensional Convolutional Neural Network, or MOD-1D-CNN, is a
customized model made for processing input sequentially. It is handy for applications like one-dimensional feature representations and time-series analysis
[29-30]. Convolutional layers operating across the temporal axis are incorporated
10

into the design, which enables the model to recognize patterns and relationships
in sequential data. MOD-1D-CNN uses convolutional processes to automatically
learn hierarchical features, which allows it to recognize pertinent patterns in
sequential input [31]. This type of CNN is typically used in cases where the data
shows sequential linkages. This technique works especially well in applications
where data is naturally sequential, such as signal processing and natural language
analysis [32-34]. The proposed MOD-1D-CNN model that is used to predict the
status of dementia from the health metrics data is a painstakingly constructed
system that uses complex layers to extract extensive features and recognize
patterns. Using Conv1D layers with a kernel size 2x2, accompanied by ReLU
activation function. These first layers serve as feature extractors, identifying
complex patterns from the health metrics data in sequence. After the Conv1D
layers, Dropout layers are placed strategically to help keep the network from
overfitting by randomly deactivating neurons during training, preventing the
network from depending too much on any one attribute. The next layer is Max-
Pooling1D, which efficiently decreases the spatial dimensions while maintaining
important characteristics, improving computing efficiency without sacrificing
essential information. After that, a flattened layer is placed so that the model
reconfigures the data, preparing it for fully connected layers. By following that,
dense layers are positioned for ReLU activation. This layer’s depth facilitates
intricate transformations within the data, enhancing the network’s ability to
discern complex patterns. The final layer, which is also a dense layer, is situated
with the sigmoid activation function, facilitating the critical binary classification
between demented and non-demented individuals. By employing the binary
cross-entropy loss function and Adam optimization with a learning rate of 0.001,
this MOD-1D-CNN model is rigorously compiled for robust training, ensuring
accurate and precise prediction of dementia status from health metrics data.
Table 2 shows the detailed network architecture of the MOD-1D-CNN model.
Table 2: Network Architecture with Number of Parameters of MOD-1D-CNN
Model
Layer Type
Kernel Size
Activation
Output
Shape
Number of
Parameters
Conv1D
2x2
ReLU
(None, 5, 64)
192
Conv1D
2x2
ReLU
(None, 4, 64)
8256
Dropout
-
-
(None, 4, 64)
0
MaxPooling1D -
-
(None, 2, 64)
0
Flatten
-
-
(None, 128)
0
Dense
-
ReLU
(None, 100)
12900
Dense
-
Sigmoid
(None, 2)
200
In summary, the MOD-1D-CNN model architecture effectively leverages Conv1D
layers with ReLU activation,
and MaxPooling1D to extract essential features from the input data efficiently.
11

The model’s ability to learn and generalize from the data is enhanced by Dropout
layers, preventing overfitting issues generated due to the dataset at a defined
rate for effective handling. These architectural choices collectively contribute to
a powerful binary classification model that can accurately distinguish between
demented and non-demented cases as per the input features of health metrics
data (blood pressure, body temperature, etc.). The training flowchart for the
MOD-1D-CNN model is shown in Fig. 3.
Fig. 3 Training Flowchart of the Proposed MOD-1D-CNN Model
2.3.2.1 MOD-1D-CNN Algorithm
The proposed algorithm for the MOD-1D-CNN model for the classification of
demented and non-demented individuals is shown below:
12

ALGORITHM-3: HEALTH PARAMETERS-BASED DEMENTIA
PREDICTION USING MOD-1D-CNN
Input: - Diabetic status (0 for absence or 1 for presence)
- Blood oxygen level (1(<95%) or 2(95%-100%) or
3(>100%))
- Body temperature: 1(<36.5oC) or 2(36.5oC – 37.5oC) or
3(>37.5oC)
- Heart rate: 1(<60bpm) or 2(60bpm – 100bpm) or
3(>100bpm)
- Weight: 1(<50kg) or 2(50kg – 70kg) or 3(>70kg)
- Age: 1(40-64) or 2(65-70) or 3(75-90)
Output: Prediction result indicating whether the individual
is demented or non-demented.
Procedure:
Begin
Initialization:
Import necessary libraries: numpy, keras.
Load the pre-trained MOD-1D-CNN
model:
load_1d_cnn_model(‘mod_1d_cnn_model.h5’).
Input Acquisition:
takeInput(): Diabetic: 0 or 1
takeInput(): Blood Oxygen Level: 1 or 2
or 3
takeInput(): Body Temperature: 1 or 2 or
3
takeInput(): Heart Rate: 1 or 2 or 3
takeInput(): Weight: 1 or 2 or 3
takeInput(): Age: 1 or 2 or 3
Data Preparation:
constructAnArray():
prepare_health_params_data(diabetic, blood_oxygen,
body_temp, heart_rate, weight, age).
normalizeData():
normalize_health_params_data(health_params_data).
Making Predictions:
Call a function for making predictions using the
loaded model:
predict_dementia_probability(loaded_model,
normalized_health_params_data).
Result:
if prediction_score > 0.5:
Output: display_result(“Prediction: Demented”).
else:
Output: display_result(“Prediction:
Non-Demented”).
13

ALGORITHM-3: HEALTH PARAMETERS-BASED DEMENTIA
PREDICTION USING MOD-1D-CNN
Termination:
end
end
2.3.2.2 Working in Game Level 1
In the first phase (Game Level 1), the typical health data (age, blood pressure,
etc.) from the user are collected and fed into our pre-trained MOD-1D-CNN
algorithm. In this stage, essential health data from the user, encompass parameters such as age, blood pressure, and other relevant metrics. It is our initial
stage of assessing dementia status of the prediction assessment. This crucial
information serves as the input for our pre-trained MOD-1D-CNN algorithm,
designed specifically for the analysis of one-dimensional health data. Users in
Game Level 1 provide age, blood pressure, and other health metrics, which are
integrated into the MOD-1D-CNN algorithm to extract patterns and correlations
from a one-dimensional health dataset. The MOD-1D-CNN algorithm, using
deep convolutional neural network architecture, efficiently processes health data
to identify subtle relationships indicating potential health conditions, facilitating comprehensive health assessments and hence results for the prediction of
dementia status whether the individual is demented or non-demented. Streamlit
is chosen for Game Level 1 hosting to improve user experience. Its intuitive
interface allows easy input of health data and application stages. Combining
MOD-1D-CNN’s power with Streamlit’s accessibility aims for a robust, usercentric experience, enhancing informed health assessment. The working in-game
level 1 for the MOD-1D-CNN model is shown in Fig. 4.
14

Fig. 4 Taking Health Metrics Input from User for Predicting Dementia Status
2.3.3 MOD-2D-CNN in Game level-2 for Image Dataset
A more sophisticated version of the conventional 2D Convolutional Neural Network designed for enhanced image recognition and feature extraction is called the
Mod-2D-CNN [35]. Key characteristics include residual connections for smoother
information flow in deeper architectures, dilated convolutions to improve the
receptive field, and multi-scale convolutional layers enabling simultaneous collection of fine- and coarse-grained data [36-38]. Spatial information is maintained
by adaptive pooling layers, and feature attention algorithms dynamically modify
feature significance. Batch normalization quickens training convergence while
dropout regularization guards against overfitting [39]. With its capacity to adapt
to different sizes and complex characteristics for strong visual identification, this
model performs exceptionally well in a wide range of computer vision applications.
Furthermore, the Mod-2D-CNN effectively recognizes global patterns by utilizing
the capability of dilated convolutions to capture long-range relationships [40].
15

Deeper networks may be trained using residual connections without running the
danger of gradients disappearing or blowing up. Interpretability is improved by
feature attention techniques, which dynamically shift the emphasis to pertinent
areas of the image [41-42].
In the proposed MOD-2D-CNN model, the architecture is designed to efficiently
process and extract the facial features from the input facial images for binary
classification.
The model contains a series of Conv2D layers with a kernel
size of 3x3, followed by ReLU activation functions. These layers are crucial
for understanding the fundamental patterns and characteristics present in the
images. After every Conv2D layer, a MaxPooling 2D operation is applied, which
reduces the spatial dimensions of the feature maps and helps to capture important
information while reducing the computational complexity. By strengthening the
translation invariance of the model and preserving pertinent information, this
pooling procedure helps the model be more resilient to changes in object location
and size. In addition to this, the flattened layer is also added to convert the 3D
output into a 1D feature vector, facilitating the transition to the fully connected
layers. Furthermore, Dropout layers and Dense layers are also employed in
the MOD-2D-CNN architecture. Dropout layers are used after Dense layers to
prevent overfitting. During training, Dropout introduces a sort of regularization
by randomly deactivating a portion of the neurons, hence decreasing reliance
between them. Better generalization results from this, strengthening the model’s
accuracy and resilience to new data. Finally, the output layer consists of a
single neuron with a sigmoidal activation function, which is used for binary
classification, providing the probability of each input belonging to either class
(demented or non-demented). The model is trained with the binary cross-entropy
loss function, which works well for problems with either 0 or 1 outcomes. It is
then optimized using the Adam optimizer, which has a learning rate of 0.0001.
Table 3 shows the detailed network architecture of the MOD-2D-CNN model.
Table 3: Network Architecture with Number of Parameters of MOD-2D-CNN
Model
Layer Type
Kernel Size
Activation
Output
Shape
Number of
Parameters
Cov2D
3x3
ReLU
(None, 222,
222, 32)
896
MaxPooling2D -
-
(None, 111,
111, 32)
0
Cov2D_1
3x3
ReLU
(None, 109,
109, 64)
14,496
MaxPooling2D_1-
-
(None, 54, 54,
64)
0
Cov2D_2
3x3
ReLU
(None, 52, 52,
128)
73,856
16

Layer Type
Kernel Size
Activation
Output
Shape
Number of
Parameters
MaxPooling2D_2-
-
(None, 26, 26,
128)
0
Cov2D_3
3x3
ReLU
(None, 24, 24,
256)
2,95, 168
MaxPooling2D_3-
-
(None, 12, 12,
256)
0
Flatten
-
-
(None, 36,864)
0
Dense
-
ReLU
(None, 512)
18,874,880
Dropout
-
-
(None, 512)
0
Dense_1
-
ReLU
(None, 256)
1,131,328
Dropout_1
-
-
(None, 256)
0
Dense_2
-
Sigmoid
(None, 1)
257
In summary, the MOD-2D-CNN model architecture successfully extracts critical
features from the input images by utilizing Conv2D, and MaxPooling layers with
ReLU activation. Dropout layers improve the model’s capacity to learn and
generalize from the data, avoiding overfitting. Together, these architectural decisions provide a potent binary classification model that effectively discriminates
between non-demented facial images and demented facial images. The training
flowchart depicted in Fig. 5 outlines the sequential steps involved in training
the MOD-2D-CNN model. The representation encapsulates the entire training
process, illustrating key stages such as data preprocessing, data splitting, model
initialization, updation of parameters, and loss calculation at the time of the
training process.
17

Fig. 5 Training Flowchart of the Proposed MOD-2D-CNN Model
2.3.3.1 MOD-2D-CNN Algorithm
The proposed algorithm for the MOD-2D-CNN model for the classification of
demented and non-demented individuals is shown below,
18

ALGORITHM-4: FACIAL CLASSIFICATION FOR DEMENTIA
DETECTION USING MOD-2D-CNN MODEL
Input: Facial image (live capture or pre-loaded)
Output: Prediction result indicating whether the individual is demented
or non-demented using facial analysis.
Procedure:
begin
Initialization:
Import necessary libraries: os, cv2, numpy, keras.
Load the pre-trained model:
keras.models.load_model(‘mod_2d_cnn_model.h5’)
Preprocessing Steps:
if inputimage is liveCapture:
use a camera to capture a live facial image:
capturedImageFromCamera()
else:
load the image from the specified file path:
loadImageFromFile(inputImage)
end if
convert image to array:
convertImageToArray(capturedImage)
expand dimensions to match the expected input
shape: expandDimensions(imageArray)
normalize the pixel values:
normalizePixels(expandedImageArray)
Making Predictions:
making predictions using the loaded model:
loadedModel.predict(preprocessedImage)
function input: Preprocessed image.
function output: Prediction score (probability of
being demented).
Result:
if predictionscore > 0.5:
output: “Prediction: Demented.”
else:
output: “Prediction: Non-Demented.”
end if
Termination:
end
end
2.3.3.2 Working in Game Level 2
In the second phase (Game Level 2), we collect the facial image (live or preloaded) from the user and feed it into our pre-trained MOD-2D-CNN algorithm.
19

During this stage, users are prompted to provide either a live or pre-loaded facial
image. It’s our second level of examination for the user to predict the dementia
status. This image is then seamlessly integrated into our advanced MOD-2D-
CNN (Modified 2D Convolutional Neural Network) algorithm, which has been
pre-trained to discern crucial patterns and features indicative of dementia. Our
cutting-edge MOD-2D-CNN algorithm serves as the backbone for predicting
dementia status, categorizing users into either the demented or non-demented
group based on the intricate analysis of facial characteristics. Streamlit is chosen
for its user-friendly interface, enhancing user interaction and accessibility in our
dementia prediction tool. It simplifies the process of submitting facial images
and providing prompt results on dementia status. The working in-game level 2
for the MOD-2D-CNN model is shown in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 for both live capture
and pre-loaded.
Fig. 6 Facial Image Capture from User Using Live Camera
20

Fig. 7 Facial Image Capture from User using Upload Option (Pre-loaded)
2.3.4 Rule-based Weightage Method for Decision-Making
Table 4, comprises two columns detailing the weights assigned to two distinct
convolutional neural network models for dementia prediction. MOD-1D-CNN
is allocated a weightage of 30%, while MOD-2D-CNN takes precedence with
a more substantial weightage of 70%. The subsequent rows delineate various
scenarios denoted by the decision outcomes, showcasing the model’s predictions
and the final decisions based on their weighted contributions.
Table 4: Decision-making using rule-based weightage method
MOD-1D-CNN
(30%
weightage)
MOD-2D-
CNN
(70%
weightage)
Decision
1
1
Demented
0
1
Demented with a high probability
1
0
Non-Demented with a high probability
0
0
Non-Demented
3. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
3.1 Dataset Description for MOD-1D-CNN
21

The dataset utilized for training and evaluating the MOD-1D-CNN for cognitive
health assessment comprises 1000 data instances sourced from the Apollo diagnostic center Kolkata, India. The central target variable, labeled “Dementia,”
assumes binary values (0 or 1), representing the absence (0) or presence (1) of
dementia. Additionally, a binary variable labeled “Diabetic” is incorporated,
indicating the absence (0) or presence (1) of diabetes. Alongside these categorical
attributes, the dataset includes five quantitative features, namely “Age,” “Blood
Oxygen Level,” “Heart Rate,” “Body Temperature,” and “Weight,” providing
crucial health metrics for the assessment. The dataset undergoes a standard
split into training (80%) and testing (20%) sets to facilitate model training and
evaluation. Within the training set, a further subdivision designates 20% of the
data (160 instances) as a validation subset, utilized during the training process
to enhance model performance and prevent overfitting. Important Variables and
Measures Included in the dataset are represented in Table 5 below.
Table 5: Dataset Description for MOD-1D-CNN
Measures
Description
Dementia
Binary variable indicating the presence (1) or absence (0)
of dementia.
Diabetic
Binary variable denoting the presence (1) or absence (0) of
diabetes.
Age
Quantitative features representing the age of individuals in
the dataset.
Blood Oxygen
Level
A quantitative measure indicating the blood oxygen level
in the subjects.
Heart Rate
Quantitative measure representing the heart rate of
individuals.
Body
Temperature
A quantitative measure indicating the body temperature
of the subjects.
Weight
Quantitative features representing the weight of
individuals.
3.2 Dataset Description for MOD-2D-CNN
The facial image dataset employed for 2D Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
analysis in this research is meticulously crafted to facilitate the accurate prediction of dementia based on facial traits. Unlike publicly available datasets, this
proprietary collection is purposefully designed with precision and care, ensuring
its alignment with the specific requirements of cognitive health assessment. The
dataset is categorized into two distinct classes: demented and non-demented,
reflecting the binary nature of the prediction task. The demented class comprises 900 facial images, each capturing distinct facial expressions and features
indicative of dementia, while the non-demented class equally contributes 900
images for a comprehensive evaluation. The training set consists of 1260 images
22

to get an in-depth understanding of facial features. The 630 images that each
class—demented and non-demented—represents offer extensive information for
training the 2D CNN model. The testing set, which consists of 360 images (180
from each class), is essential for evaluating the generalization capabilities of the
model. This portion of the dataset is left unaltered during the model-training
procedure, providing an objective assessment of the model’s prediction capabilities on data that hasn’t been seen before. A validation set of 180 images
(90 from each class) is used in the model training phase to adjust the model
parameters and avoid overfitting. This iterative approach guarantees the trained
model’s resilience and dependability. Table 6 describes the detailed dataset split
ratio for the demented as well as non–demented class of facial images.
Table 6: Dataset Split for Dementia Classification using Facial Images
Dataset
Split
Demented
Class
Non-
Demented
Class
Total
Images
Reference
Training
Set
630
630
1260
Testing Set
180
180
360
[72-75]
Validation
Set
90
90
180
Total =
1800
It is crucial to emphasize that this facial image dataset is not sourced from public
repositories but is instead a purpose-built collection created by the research
team. This deliberate approach guarantees the dataset’s tailored relevance to
the research objectives, providing a solid foundation for accurate and insightful
dementia prediction through facial image analysis.
3.3 Execution Platform
The implementation is carried over the Jupyter Notebook Environment using
Python Programming Language for the preparation of models. All the results
are analyzed and conducted on the underlying system configuration.
• Intel core i5 10th generation processor.
• 12 GB of RAM.
• 256 GB SSD.
3.4 Extraction of Features and Dataset Preprocessing of MOD-1D-
CNN
In the pursuit of developing a robust cognitive health assessment MOD-1D-
CNN model, the initial phase involves meticulous preprocessing of the dataset
23

obtained from a diagnostic center. This dataset, rich in diverse health metrics,
is meticulously divided into distinct classes, such as heart rate, age, body
temperature, blood oxygen level, weight, diabetes, and dementia which is our
target variable. These classes serve as crucial indicators in the evaluation of
dementia. In the case of MOD-1D-CNN, the following preprocessing procedures
are applied,
a. Numerical Features Categorization: The categorization involves defining
explicit classes for key health metrics, ensuring a comprehensive representation of cognitive health. For heart rate, three classes are delineated: Class
I signifies a heart rate below 60 bpm, Class II spans heart rates between
60 and 100 bpm, and Class III designates heart rates exceeding 100 bpm.
Age categories encompass Class I (40-64 years), Class II (65-74 years),
and Class III (75-90 years). Body temperature is stratified into Class I
(<36.5°C), Class II (36.5°C-37.5°C), and Class III (>37.5°C). Similarly,
blood oxygen levels are categorized as Class I (<95%), Class II (95%-100%),
and Class III (>100%). Weight classes are defined as Class I (<50 kg),
Class II (50-70 kg), and Class III (>70 kg).
b. Data Preprocessing: Features and target variables are separated in this
step, where X represents features, and Y represents the target variable
“Dementia”.
c. Oversampling
using
Synthetic
Minority
Over-sampling
Technique
(SMOTE): SMOTE (Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique) is
applied to oversample the minority in the training dataset.
d. Normalization/Scaling: Standard scaling is performed on the features to
normalize the data using ‘StandardScaler’ to ensure uniformity.
e. Batch Processing: For the MOD-1D-CNN model in our case the dataset is
divided into 32 batches in size to accelerate the process of training so that
multiple samples of data inputs can be processed at the same time.
3.5 Feature Mapping of MOD-1D-CNN
Feature mapping is a key part of aligning different health parameters with the
architecture of the neural network. This makes it easier to find patterns and
correlations in the input data [43-44]. In the context of our research, feature
mapping involves the systematic arrangement and representation of health-related
features such as Diabetic status, Age classification, Heart Rate classification,
Blood Oxygen Level classification, Body Temperature classification, and Weight
classification. These features serve as the input variables for the subsequent
MOD-1D Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) model, which aims to predict
dementia based on the provided health metrics.
3.6 Extraction of Features and Dataset Preprocessing of MOD-2D-
CNN
Feature extraction and dataset preprocessing are important steps in the MOD-
24

2D-CNN model for getting the facial images of people with and without dementia
ready for binary classification. Feature extraction entails converting unstructured
data—in this case, facial images of people with and without dementia—into
a format that the model can use [45-46]. In the case of MOD-2D-CNN, the
following preprocessing techniques are applied:
a. Rescaling: The pixel values of the images are rescaled by dividing them by
255. This step ensures that the pixel values are within the range of 0 to 1.
b. Data Augmentation: Various augmentation techniques are employed to
increase the variability and diversity of the training dataset. These techniques include rotation, height, and width shifting, shearing, zooming,
and horizontal flipping. Data augmentation helps in mitigating overfitting
issues and generalizes the model’s ability to handle unseen data.
c. Target Size: The images are resized to a target size of 224x224 pixels.
Resizing the images to a fixed size allows for consistent input dimensions
across the dataset and facilitates an efficient way of processing with the
neural network architecture.
d. Color Mode: The color mode of the images is set to RGB, representing red,
green, and blue color channels. RGB color images are well suited for the
task of computer vision and provide richer information for the model to
learn patterns from them.
e. Batch Processing: The dataset is divided into batches of size 32 in our case.
Batch processing enables parallel computation and accelerates the process
of training, as multiple images can be processed simultaneously.
f. Class Mode: The class mode is set to “binary” to reflect the fact that
this is a binary classification task using the labels “DEMENTED” and
“NON-DEMENTED”.
These preprocessing techniques, such as rescaling, data augmentation, resizing,
color mode selection, and batch processing, collectively enhance the model’s
ability to learn patterns from the pixel values associated with the input images
and make accurate predictions based on those learned features.
3.7 Feature Mapping of MOD-2D-CNN
Feature mapping is mainly used to visualize the activation patterns across
different convolutional hidden layers. This process allows us to understand and
interpret the representation of the learned features by the model [47]. Feature
mapping incorporates processes like extracting and visualizing the intermediate
feature maps produced by each convolutional layer [48]. These feature maps
identify particular structures, patterns, or textures in the input images. We
can find more insights about how the model is learning and which features are
being prioritized by viewing these feature maps at every convolutional layer. An
example image is taken from the dataset and passed through the MOD-2D-CNN
model to obtain the layer activations. As shown in Fig. 8, the activations
25

are then processed and displayed to provide a grid of images, each of which
represents the activation of a particular filter inside a certain convolutional layer.
a. First Conv2D layer with 32 filters
b. Second Conv2D layer with 64 filters
c. Third Conv2D layer with 128 filters
d. Fourth Conv2D layer with 256 filters
Fig. 8 Feature Mapping of the Convolutional Layers
By visualizing the visual interpretations of the feature maps of the conv2D
layers, we can observe that the activations of individual filters and their spatial
relationships are represented. This visualization explains how the model identifies
many traits and patterns that the model recognizes as the input propagates
through the neural network. Furthermore, it provides insights into the learned
representation’s hierarchical structure, in which more abstract and complex
features are captured by higher layers.
4. RESULT ANALYSIS
4.1 Evaluation Metrics
Accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score, and the confusion matrix are some of the
evaluation metrics that are frequently used to find the effectiveness of the MOD-
1D-CNN and MOD-2D-CNN models. These metrics offer a thorough grasp
of the model’s classification abilities and its capability to distinguish between
non-demented and demented patients effectively. In this subsection, we define
each metric, present their mathematical formulae, and discuss their specific uses
in evaluating the performance of the demented detection system. Let TP be the
truly predicted demented cases, TN be the truly predicted non-demented cases,
26

FP be the falsely predicted demented cases and FN be the falsely predicted
non-demented cases.
A. Accuracy:
Accuracy is a pivotal metric that gauges the precision of a classification model’s
forecasts, indicating the extent of accurately classified occasions within the
dataset [49]. A high accuracy score shows the model’s adequacy in foreseeing
correct classes [50]. In any case, more is needed in imbalanced datasets, because
it may distort the model’s execution.
Accuracy =
T P + T N
T P + T N + F P + F N . . . . . . . . . (1)
Accuracy is commonly used to evaluate the overall performance of the MOD-1D-
CNN and MOD-2D-CNN models and provide a single metric for classifying the
classes in the dataset.
B. Precision:
Precision expresses the ratio of true positives to total positive instances, which
indicates how accurate a model is in making positive predictions [51]. It measures the model’s accuracy in designating positive examples, guaranteeing their
applicability. When false positives are expensive or unwanted, high accuracy is
essential [52].
Precision =
T P
T P + F P . . . . . . . . . .(2)
When it comes to avoiding false positive mistakes, precision is very critical. It
assists in assessing how well the system detects cases of dementia.
C. Recall (Sensitivity):
The recall measures a model’s ability to accurately distinguish all positive
instances in a dataset, indicating its ability to recognize and capture the most
positive instances without missing many, particularly in situations where false
negatives are costly or destructive [53].
Recall =
T P
T P + F N . . . . . . . . . .(3)
To minimize false negatives and identify as many dementia patients as feasible,
recall is crucial [54]. It aids in evaluating the sensitivity of the MOD-1D-CNN
and MOD-2D-CNN models in precisely identifying instances of dementia.
D. F1-Score:
The F1-score is a metric that evaluates a classification model’s performance
by combining precision and recall. It’s useful in uneven class distributions or
when false positives and false negatives have varying importance [55]. A higher
F1-score indicates a better balance between these metrics, showcasing an optimal
trade-off.
F1 −score = 2 × P recision ×Recall
P recision + Recall . . . . . . . . . .(4)
27

A thorough assessment of the system’s performance that strikes a balance between
precision and recall is provided by the F1-score [56]. When minimizing false
positive and false negative mistakes is necessary, it is frequently utilized.
E. ROC - AUC Score:
The Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve and ROC-AUC score are
used to evaluate a classification model’s performance. The ROC curve represents
the trade-off between the genuine positive rate (sensitivity) and the false positive
rate (specificity) at different thresholds [57-58]. The area under the ROC curve
(AUC) measures the MOD-1D-CNN and MOD-2D-CNN model’s ability to
differentiate between classes.
F. Confusion Matrix:
The confusion matrix is a tabular representation of the MOD-1D-CNN and
MOD-2D-CNN model’s predicted classifications against the actual ground truth,
presenting the counts of true Demented cases, true Non-Demented cases, falsely
predicted Demented cases, and falsely predicted Non-Demented cases, and
serves as the basis for calculating accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score. The
confusion matrix helps analyze the MOD-1D-CNN and MOD-2D-CNN model’s
errors, identify areas for improvement, and optimize its performance. It provides
a comprehensive understanding of the model’s classification capabilities, enabling
further enhancements and optimizations [59-62]. This enhances the accuracy
and reliability of the model, benefiting patients and healthcare providers.
4.2 Result Analysis of MOD-1D-CNN
The Mod 1D CNN model’s classification report shows that it has a remarkable
capacity to distinguish between the Demented and Non-Demented classes. The
performance of the MOD-1D Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) model is
evaluated across different epochs to understand its learning trajectory. After
training for 100 epochs, the model achieved an accuracy of 0.62, precision of 0.59,
recall of 0.61, and an F1-score of 0.61. As training progressed to 150 epochs, there
was a noticeable improvement in accuracy (0.64), precision (0.62), recall (0.61),
and F1-score (0.62). Finally, after 200 epochs, the model demonstrated further
enhancement, achieving an accuracy of 0.70, precision of 0.68, recall of 0.69,
and an F1-score of 0.68. The accuracy, which represents the overall correctness
of the model’s predictions, exhibited a consistent upward trend, reaching its
highest value at 200 epochs. Precision, indicating the model’s ability to avoid
false positives, increased steadily. Recall, highlighting the model’s capacity to
capture true positive instances, also showed improvement over the epochs. The
F1-score, a harmonic mean of precision and recall, reached 0.68, emphasizing
the balanced performance of the model in identifying instances of dementia. A
thorough analysis of the model’s performance across different epochs can be
found in the classification report in Table 7.
Table 7: Performance metrics evolution of Mod 1D CNN Model
28

Epoch
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1-Score
100
0.62
0.59
0.61
0.61
150
0.64
0.62
0.61
0.62
200
0.70
0.68
0.69
0.68
Fig. 9, shows how training accuracy and validation accuracy changed against
epochs for the MOD-1D-CNN model.
Fig. 9 Accuracy vs Epoch
Likewise, Fig. 10 shows how loss and validation loss changed against epochs for
the MOD-1D-CNN model.
29

Fig. 10 Loss vs Epoch
4.3 Result Analysis of MOD-2D-CNN
In Table 7, we present the comprehensive results of the MOD-2D-CNN model for
facial image analysis, specifically focused on distinguishing between demented
and non-demented classes. The model’s performance metrics are evaluated across
different training epochs to understand its evolving effectiveness. In the first trial
at epoch 30, the MOD-2D-CNN model demonstrated a commendable performance
with an accuracy of 86%. Precision, a metric emphasizing the model’s capability
to minimize false positives, is observed at 86%, indicating accurate positive
predictions. The recall, representing the model’s effectiveness in identifying all
relevant instances of a class, is also at 86%, ensuring comprehensive coverage of
both demented and non-demented instances. The F1-score, a harmonic mean of
precision and recall, stood at 86%. In the second trial at epoch 40, the model
continued to show improvement. The accuracy experienced a slight increase
to 87%, reinforcing the model’s capacity for precise classification. Precision
remained high at 86%, underscoring the model’s consistency in making accurate
positive predictions. However, there is a modest reduction in recall to 84%. The
F1-score at this epoch is 84%. A detailed analysis of the classification report
across different epochs is shown in Table 8.
Table 8: Performance metrics of MOD-2D-CNN
Epoch
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1-Score
30
0.86
0.86
0.86
0.86
30

Epoch
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1-Score
40
0.87
0.86
0.84
0.84
50
0.95
0.94
0.93
0.93
In the final trial at epoch 50, the model reached its peak performance, demonstrating an impressive accuracy of 95%. This substantial improvement underscored
the model’s advanced ability to correctly categorize instances. Precision maintained a high level of 94%, indicating the model’s continued accuracy in positive
predictions. Notably, recall experienced a substantial improvement to 93%,
signifying the model’s heightened capability to identify instances across both
classes. The F1-score at this epoch reached 93%. Looking at the confusion
matrix in Fig. 11, we can see that there are 164 truly predicted demented
cases (TP), where the model correctly classified demented cases. There are 171
truly predicted non-demented cases (TN), where the model correctly classified
non-demented cases. The model has 9 falsely predicted demented cases (FP),
incorrectly classifying non-demented cases as demented. Additionally, there
are 16 falsely predicted non-demented cases (FN), where the model incorrectly
classified demented cases as non-demented.
Fig. 11 Confusion Matrix of the MOD-2D-CNN Model
The accuracy versus epoch plot, presented below in Fig. 12, provides a dynamic
visual representation of the MOD-2D-CNN model’s performance throughout 50
epochs during the training process.
31

Fig. 12 Accuracy vs Epochs
Similarly, Fig. 13 shows training loss and validation loss of the MOD-2D-CNN
models across 50 epochs.
Fig. 13 Loss vs Epochs
An Area under the ROC Curve (AUC) of 0.97 in Fig. 14 shown below provides
a visual representation of the MOD-2D-CNN model’s performance which indicates that the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve performs well
in distinguishing between demented and non-demented individuals based on
facial images. This represents that the model is quite accurate in differentiating
between those who have dementia and those who do not.
32

Fig. 14 Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) Curve for MOD-2D-CNN
Model
To guarantee the predictive capacity for the face analysis of demented and
non-demented individuals, a thorough assessment of the MOD-2D-CNN model’s
predictive performance is carried out utilizing a collection of test photos. The
MOD-2D-CNN model demonstrated its proficiency in analyzing facial features
to make predictions about cognitive health. The resulting predictions of the test
images are shown in Fig. 15. This analysis shows the model’s effectiveness in
discerning subtle patterns within facial imagery, underlining its potential as a
valuable tool for early diagnosis and risk assessment in the context of dementia.
The results presented herein exemplify a dual-model strategy for dementia
prediction, with MOD-1D-CNN holding a 30% weightage and MOD-2D-CNN
taking precedence with a substantial 70% weightage.
Fig. 15 Predictive Analysis of Dementia Using Facial Images
In Fig. 16, MOD-1D-CNN predicts a case as Demented using typical test health
metrics data, and MOD-2D-CNN aligns with this prediction using a facial image,
resulting in an overall decision of Demented. In Fig. 17, although MOD-1D-CNN
33

predicts Non-Demented, the ultimate decision is in favor of demented due to the
higher confidence level provided by MOD-2D-CNN.
4.4 Discussion and Comparison
4.3.1 MOD-1D-CNN
In the comparison analysis of MOD-1D-CNN, various optimizers, namely Adam,
Adadelta, Adamax, Adagrad, SGD, RMSprop, and AdamW, are employed to
evaluate the model’s performance in terms of accuracy, precision, recall, and F1score, as demonstrated in Table 9. The findings reveal that the Adam optimizer
achieved the highest accuracy of 0.70, surpassing other optimizers. In terms of
precision, Adam also outperformed other optimizers with a precision score of
0.68, while other optimizers exhibited the lowest precision.
Fig. 16 Decision Outcome - Demented with Congratulations Page
A similar trend is observed in the recall, where Adam demonstrated the highest
score of 0.69, while all others are at the lowest. F1-score, reflecting the balance
between precision and recall, mirrored the overall trends, with Adam leading with
0.68. This suggests that Adam’s optimization is better for understanding the
patterns in the dataset for the accurate prediction of the class labels demented
or non-demented.
Table 9: Comparison of Training MOD-1D-CNN using Different Optimizers
34

Optimizers
Adam
Adadelta Adamax Adagrad
SGD
RMSprop AdamW
Accuracy0.70
0.50
0.62
0.49
0.55
0.62
0.55
Precision0.68
0.48
0.58
0.47
0.53
0.59
0.52
Recall
0.69
0.49
0.60
0.47
0.52
0.60
0.54
F1-
Score
0.68
0.47
0.59
0.47
0.52
0.60
0.54
Fig. 17 Decision Outcome - Demented with high probability
In Fig. 18, although MOD-1D-CNN predicts Demented, the ultimate decision
is in favor of Non-Demented due to the higher confidence level provided by
MOD-2D-CNN.
35

Fig. 18 Decision Outcome - Non-Demented with high probability
Conversely, Fig. 19 showcases agreement between both models in predicting
Non-Demented, resulting in a conclusive decision of Non-Demented.
36

Fig. 19 Decision Outcome - Non-Demented
The findings indicate that the MOD-1D-CNN’s performance is greatly impacted
by the optimizer selected, with Adam showing to be the most efficient in terms of
all evaluation metrics. This investigation sheds light on the specifics of optimizer
influence on model performance and emphasizes how crucial it is to use the
right optimizer for 1D convolutional neural networks to get optimal results.
In the comparative analysis of model parameters for MOD-1D-CNN, artificial
neural network (ANN), and long short-term memory (LSTM), the focus lies on
trainable and non-trainable parameters, as well as the overall total parameters.
A comparison of parameters to those of other various models is shown in Table
10. MOD-1D-CNN exhibits a total of 21,550 parameters, with all being trainable,
signifying the model’s capability to learn from the training data. In contrast, the
artificial neural network (ANN) demonstrates a significantly lower parameter
count, with a total of 163 trainable parameters. In this case, there are no nontrainable parameters, emphasizing the simplicity of the model. Long short-term
memory (LSTM), on the other hand, presents a larger parameter count, with
120,641 trainable parameters and no non-trainable parameters.
Table 10: Comparison of the Number of Parameters of the MOD-1D-CNN
model with other models
Models
Trainable
Parameters
Non-Trainable
Parameters
Total
Parameters
MOD-1D-
CNN
21550
0
21,550
ANN
163
0
163
LSTM
120641
0
1,20,641
This analysis underscores the diversity in parameter complexity across the models.
MOD-1D-CNN’s intermediate parameter count suggests a balance between model
complexity and simplicity. The effectiveness of the MOD-1D-CNN model is
compared with the other cutting-edge deep learning models that are shown in
Table 11. The training, validation, and test accuracies are assessed at 100, 150,
and 200 epochs in the thorough comparison analysis across various training
epochs for MOD-1D-CNN, artificial neural network (ANN), and long short-term
memory (LSTM) to determine the model’s learning capacities over time. At
100 epochs, MOD-1D-CNN exhibits a training accuracy of 63.1%, a validation
accuracy of 61.0%, and a test accuracy of 58.9%. In comparison, ANN achieves
slightly lower accuracies with 60.8%, 58.5%, and 59.2% for training, validation,
and test sets, respectively. Long short-term memory (LSTM), on the other hand,
records accuracies of 59.8%, 56.8%, and 59.8%. As the training progresses to 150
epochs, MOD-1D-CNN sees improvements, achieving training, validation, and
test accuracies of 64.6%, 62.6%, and 62.3%, respectively. ANN also demonstrates
incremental improvements with accuracies of 61.7%, 59.8%, and 60.1%, while
LSTM maintains relatively stable performance with 60.7%, 58.9%, and 60.0% for
37

the three sets. Upon reaching 200 epochs, MOD-1D-CNN continues to exhibit
substantial enhancements, achieving training, validation, and test accuracies of
73.2%, 71.8%, and 70.5%. ANN displays a modest increase with accuracies of
62.6%, 64.5%, and 61.2%, while LSTM shows marginal improvements, recording
accuracies of 61.6%, 61.3%, and 60.5%.
Table 11: Comparison of Accuracy of MOD-1D-CNN with other models for
different epochs
100
Epochs
150
Epochs
200
Epochs
ModelsTrain
Accuracy
Val
Accuracy
Test
Accuracy
Train
Accuracy
Val
Accuracy
Test
Accuracy
Train
Accuracy
Val
Accuracy
Test
Accuracy
MOD-
1D-
CNN
0.631
0.610
0.589
0.646
0.626
0.623
0.732
0.718
0.705
ANN
0.608
0.585
0.592
0.617
0.598
0.601
0.626
0.645
0.612
LSTM 0.598
0.568
0.598
0.607
0.589
0.600
0.616
0.613
0.605
This analysis provides insights into the model’s learning trajectories over different
epochs, demonstrating MOD-1D-CNN’s capacity for continued improvement and
outperforming both ANN and LSTM across various training durations.
4.3.2 MOD-2D-CNN
The MOD-2D-CNN model is compiled using seven different optimizers for
comparison analysis across diverse optimizers to test on the image set, and their
performance is evaluated on a test set of 360 images.
Table 12: Comparison of Training MOD-2D-CNN using Different Optimizers
Optimizers
Adam
Adadelta Adamax Adagrad
SGD
RMSprop AdamW
Accuracy0.95
0.55
0.83
0.51
0.50
0.92
0.88
Precision0.93
0.54
0.83
0.50
0.49
0.92
0.89
Recall
0.93
0.50
0.83
0.50
0.48
0.92
0.88
F1-
Score
0.93
0.50
0.83
0.50
0.48
0.92
0.87
The optimizer selection has a considerable impact on the MOD-2D-CNN model’s
performance, as demonstrated in Table 12. Among the optimizers tested during
50 epochs of iteration, Adam emerged as the most effective, achieving the
highest accuracy of 0.95 and demonstrating strong precision, recall, and f1-score
38

all hovering around values of 0.93 at 50 epochs. This suggests that Adam’s
optimization is well-suited for enhancing the model’s ability to correctly classify
both positive and negative instances, as well as minimizing false positives and
false negatives.
Adam’s adaptability makes it an effective choice for deep
learning tasks such as image classification since it allows it to converge rapidly
and efficiently over complicated loss landscapes. Table 13 compares the MOD-
2D-CNN model’s total number of parameters to those of various well-known
pre-trained models, including VGG-16, ResNet-50, and MobileNet. The MOD-
2D-CNN model demonstrates an impressive parameter efficiency with a total of
19,394,881 parameters consisting entirely of trainable parameters, indicating that
its architecture does not incorporate non-trainable parameters and the value for
non-trainable parameters is 0. In contrast, VGG16, a well-known architecture,
has 21,137,729 total parameters which is little much more than the MOD-
2D-CNN model, with 6,423,041 being trainable and 14,714,688 non-trainable.
ResNet50 surpasses the others in terms of the sheer number of parameters, with
49,278,337 in total, comprising 25,690,625 trainable parameters and 23,587,712
non-trainable parameters which is two and a half times more than the MOD-2D-
CNN model. MobileNet, on the other hand, has a total of 16,074,433 parameters
in total, which is somehow less than the MOD-2D-CNN model’s total parameters
because of its lightweight architecture which is reflected in its lower parameter
count making it suitable for resource-constrained architecture, with 12,845,569
being trainable and 3,228,864 non-trainable.
Table 13: Comparison of the Number of Parameters of the MOD-2D-CNN
model with other models
Models
Trainable
Parameters
Non-Trainable
Parameters
Total
Parameters
MOD-2D-CNN
19,394,881
0
19,394,881
VGG16
6,423,041
14,714,688
21,137,729
RestNet50
25,690,625
23,587,712
49,278,337
MobileNet
12,845,569
3,228,864
16,074,433
In contrast, the MOD-2D-CNN model’s design strikes a balance between model
complexity and parameter efficiency, showcasing that high accuracy and performance can be achieved without excessive parameter usage. MOD-2D-CNN
parameter efficiency also extends its attention to the non-trainable parameters
because its value is 0 which says that architecture does not exhibit any nontrainable parameters. In contrast, other pre-trained models like ResNet50 have
a staggering 23 million non-trainable parameters, which can lead to increased
memory usage and longer initialization times. This simplicity makes MOD-2D-
CNN a more practical choice for resource-constrained environments, such as edge
devices or low-power hardware. Moreover, a model with fewer parameters tends
to generalize better and is less prone to overfitting. MOD-2D-CNN relatively
smaller parameter count allows it to generalize well even with limited training
39

data, making it a robust and reliable solution for dementia classification. While
some of the larger pre-trained models like VGG16, ResNet50, and MobileNet
might achieve slightly higher accuracy on certain datasets, they come at the
cost of increased computational requirements and memory consumption. The
parameter efficiency of MOD-2D-CNN, combined with its competitive accuracy
and performance, positions it as a more noble and practical choice for real-world
applications. The effectiveness of the MOD-2D-CNN model is also contrasted
with that of other cutting-edge deep learning models, such as the ones in Table
14 (VGG-16, ResNet50, and MobileNet). All the models are trained on the
same facial image dataset, allowing for a fair and meaningful comparison across
different epoch trials (30, 40, and 50).
Table 14: Comparison of Accuracy of MOD-1D-CNN with other pre-trained
models with different epochs
30
Epochs
40
Epochs
50
Epochs
ModelsTrain
Accuracy
Val
Accuracy
Test
Accuracy
Train
Accuracy
Val
Accuracy
Test
Accuracy
Train
Accuracy
Val
Accuracy
Test
Accuracy
MOD-
2D-
CNN
0.837
0.821
0.858
0.862
0.855
0.850
0.959
0.933
0.957
VGG16 0.851
0.916
0.927
0.856
0.922
0.930
0.944
0.938
0.913
Res
Net50
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.51
0.52
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.50
Mobile
Net
0.967
0.950
0.933
0.850
0.933
0.933
0.50
0.51
0.50
In the case of MOD-2D-CNN, it demonstrated consistent improvement in both
training and validation accuracy as the number of epochs increased. At 30
epochs, MOD-2D-CNN achieved a training accuracy of 83.7%, a validation
accuracy of 82.1%, and a test accuracy of 85.8%. The model continued to exhibit
enhanced performance at 40 epochs, with training accuracy reaching 86.2%,
validation accuracy at 85.5%, and a test accuracy of 85.0%. Surprisingly, at
50 epochs, MOD-2D-CNN demonstrated remarkable improvement, reaching a
training accuracy of 95.9%, validation accuracy of 93.3%, and test accuracy
of 95.7%.
This notable performance may indicate that the model benefits
from increased training epochs. Comparatively, VGG16 exhibited commendable
performance across different training epochs. At 30 epochs, the model achieved a
training accuracy of 85.1%, a validation accuracy of 91.6%, and a test accuracy of
92.7%. The accuracy levels continued to be consistent at 40 epochs, with training
accuracy reaching 85.6%, validation accuracy at 92.2%, and test accuracy at
93.0%. While there is a slight dip in test accuracy at 50 epochs at 91.3%, VGG16
40

maintained high training accuracy at 94.4% and validation accuracy at 93.8%.
This consistent performance suggests that VGG16 is a robust model for image
classification tasks. However, MOD-2D-CNN demonstrated slightly superior
accuracy at the same epoch, suggesting its potential as a robust model for image
classification tasks. On the other hand, ResNet50 faced challenges in achieving
meaningful accuracy, struggling to surpass 50% throughout all epochs. At 30, 40,
and 50 epochs, the model consistently reported a training, validation, and test
accuracy of 50.0%, indicating potential issues in convergence or model suitability
for the dataset. This shows that MOD-2D-CNN is more robust than ResNet50 in
learning the patterns of images for the accurate classification of demented people
as well as non-demented ones. Whereas MobileNet, while initially displaying
impressive performance at 30 epochs with a training accuracy of 96.7% and
validation accuracy of 95.0%, struggled to maintain accuracy in subsequent
epochs. At 40 epochs, the model’s training accuracy dropped to 85.0%, and the
validation accuracy decreased to 93.3%, with the test accuracy falling to 50.0%.
This trend continued at 50 epochs, with training accuracy at 50.0%, validation
accuracy at 51.0%, and test accuracy at 50.0%. In contrast, MOD-2D-CNN
consistently outperformed MobileNet across all epochs, highlighting its robustness
in comparison. In summary, MOD-2D-CNN demonstrated competitive accuracy
levels and exhibited excellent generalization, parameter efficiency, and robustness
in classifying demented as well as non-demented individuals through facial
analysis, especially at 50 epochs, making it a promising candidate for image
classification tasks when compared to the competitive models like VGG16,
ResNet50, and MobileNet. MOD-2D-CNN consistently outperforms them on the
test set which makes it a noble choice and a leading solution for the classification
of dementia through facial image, highlighting its practicality and effectiveness
in real-world scenarios.
Table 15: Comparison of the proposed methodology with some popular
gaming applications for healthcare
Literature
Works
Used
Technology
Applications
Pros
Cons
[63], [64], [65]
Virtual
reality,
memory
server, basic
processor.
• Patient care
•
Entertainment
• Surgeon
and nurse
training
• dental
implant
training
• Nurse
transition
Suitable
for
medical
training
and
patient
entertainment,
smart
virtual
reality
Not useful
for disease
detection,
skilled
persons are
required to
handle
41

Literature
Works
Used
Technology
Applications
Pros
Cons
[71], [67]
Microsoft
Kinect, and
other
bio-signal
capture
devices,
Virtual
reality,
high-end
processors,
and memory
servers.
• Neuropsychological
rehabilitation
• upper limb
rehabilitation
• chronic
pain rehabilitation
diagnosis
•
management
of
Parkinson’s
3D
versions
are
available
Not userfriendly,
EEG signal
analysis
complexity,
Expensive,
Expert/skilled
person
required
[68], [70]
Virtual
reality, NLP
algorithms,
IoT,
Hypertext
Application
Language,
MySQL,
taxonomy,
ML APIs.
• Fat and carbohydrate
Oxidation
• heart rate
improvement
• energy
expenditure
Smart
GUI,
scalability,
auto
adaptability,
virtualization
the use of
Node-RED
and other
third-party
APIs,
Expensive,
Expert/skilled
person
required
[69]
Blending
reality and
AR/VR,
NVIDIA
DLSS
algorithm,
Mobile
devices
• Health
monitoring
• clinical
detection,
treatment,
rehabilitation
• recovery
tracking,
professional
Intelligent
graphics
design, 3D
application
Expensive,
needs skilled
users to
handle
[66]
Bayesian
gametheoretic
model, Multiobjective
Evolutionary
Algorithm
using Fuzzy
Genetics
• Clinical
Decision
Support
System
Efficient
resource
utilization,
and
computationally
costeffective
solution
Low
Accuracy
42

Literature
Works
Used
Technology
Applications
Pros
Cons
Proposed
MOD-CNN
1D and 2D
CNN deep
learning
architectures
for two layers
of training &
testing,
Javascript,
HTML &
CSS, memory
server, OS,
basic
hardware,
Mobile
devices
(flexible)
• Dementia
detection of
gaming
application
users
First-ofits-kind,
easy-toinstall,
dementia
detection
testing
accuracy
is high,
portable,
reliable,
secure,
quickly
responsive,
userfriendly,
ageindependent,
and costeffective
2D Gaming
application
needs to
improve the
layout
Table 15 provides a comparison of our proposed AI-based gaming application with
some existing state-of-the-art healthcare gaming application works concerning
used technology, application areas, advantages, and disadvantages.
5. CONCLUSIONS
In this work, we have introduced an innovative cognitive assessment game that
seamlessly integrates gameplay elements with a sophisticated early diagnosis
methodology. The game comprises two levels - “Basic Match” and “Ultimate
Test” and evaluates critical cognitive abilities that are essential for early dementia identification. The transition from gameplay to cognitive assessment is
smooth, enhancing the overall utility of the proposed approach. The research
incorporates two models tailored for the binary classification of dementia status
using a health metrics dataset as well as a facial image dataset. The introduced
Modified 1D Convolutional Neural Network (MOD-1D-CNN) is used to analyze
a dataset comprising health metrics for accurately identifying dementia traits
and the other model i.e. Modified 2D Convolutional Neural Network (MOD-
2D-CNN) introduces a facial-based image classification for the demented as well
non-demented individual. Through rigorous evaluation and comparison-based
analysis with the other state-of-the-art models, the MOD-1D-CNN and MOD-
2D-CNN models show their superiority in accuracy, efficiency, and generalization
capabilities, solidifying their position as noble and valuable contributions to the
43

field of dementia detection. Both the models with the efficient parameter design
ensure practicality and feasibility in resource-constrained settings, including
regions with limited computational resources. Moreover, the MOD-1D-CNN and
MOD-2D-CNN model’s interpretability fosters transparency and enhances trust
enabling them to make more informed decisions based on model predictions.
The work contributes to bridging the research gap in early dementia detection
by presenting a holistic cognitive assessment system that amalgamates gaming,
data-driven analytics, and advanced deep learning techniques. The findings
underscore the potential of this approach for early identification of cognitive
deviations, thereby advancing the field of dementia research and cognitive health
assessment.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We have obtained the health parameter datasets from Apollo Clinic, Kolkata.
We appreciate Mr. Souvik Das, Floor Manager, Apollo Clinic, Kolkata, for
dedicating his time, effort, and continuous assistance in gathering the dataset.
Ethical Approval
Not Applicable.
Competing Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Consent to Participate
All the authors have equally participated in this work.
Funding
There is no funding involved for this work.
Data Availability Statement
Data are available upon reasonable request to the corresponding authors.
REFERENCES
[1] Valcour, V. G., Masaki, K. H., Curb, J. D., & Blanchette, P. L. (2000). The
detection of dementia in the primary care setting. Archives of internal medicine,
160(19), 2964-2968.
[2] Giaquinto, S., & Parnetti, L. (2006). Early detection of dementia in clinical
practice. Mechanisms of ageing and development, 127(2), 123-128.
[3] Palmer, K., Bäckman, L., Winblad, B., & Fratiglioni, L. (2003). Detection
of Alzheimer’s disease and dementia in the preclinical phase: population based
cohort study. Bmj, 326(7383), 245.
[4] Graafland, M., & Schijven, M. (2018). How serious games will improve
healthcare. Digital health: scaling healthcare to the world, 139-157.
44

[5] Raja, B. S., & Asghar, S. (2020). Disease classification in health care systems
with game theory approach. IEEE Access, 8, 83298-83311.
[6] Abd-Alrazaq, A., Abuelezz, I., Hassan, A., AlSammarraie, A., Alhuwail, D.,
Irshaidat, S., ... & Househ, M. (2022). Artificial Intelligence–Driven Serious
Games in Health Care: Scoping Review. JMIR serious games, 10(4), e39840.
[7] Kherchouche, A., Ben-Ahmed, O., Guillevin, C., Tremblais, B., Julian, A.,
Fernandez-Maloigne, C., & Guillevin, R. (2022). Attention-guided neural network
for early dementia detection using MRS data. Computerized Medical Imaging
and Graphics, 99, 102074.
[8] Alex, J. S. R., Bhyri, R., Usha, G. P., & Arvind, S. V. (2023). Noninvasive
Detection of Alzheimer’s Disease from Conversational Speech Using 1D-CNN.
In Futuristic Communication and Network Technologies: Select Proceedings of
VICFCNT 2021, Volume 1 (pp. 583-592). Singapore: Springer Nature Singapore.
[9] Qayyum, A., Khan, M. A., Mazher, M., & Suresh, M. (2018, November).
Classification of eeg learning and resting states using 1d-convolutional neural
network for cognitive load assesment. In 2018 IEEE Student Conference on
Research and Development (SCOReD) (pp. 1-5). IEEE.
[10] Paliokas, I., Tzallas, A., Katertsidis, N., Votis, K., & Tzovaras, D. (2017,
October). Gamification in social networking: a platform for people living with
dementia and their caregivers. In 2017 IEEE 17th International Conference on
Bioinformatics and Bioengineering (BIBE) (pp. 574-579). IEEE.
[11] Zhang, B., & Chignell, M. (2020, August). A framework for using cognitive
assessment games for people living with dementia. In 2020 IEEE 8th International Conference on Serious Games and Applications for Health (SeGAH) (pp.
1-8). IEEE.
[12] Chi, H., Agama, E., & Prodanoff, Z. G. (2017, April). Developing serious
games to promote cognitive abilities for the elderly. In 2017 IEEE 5th International Conference on Serious Games and Applications for Health (SeGAH) (pp.
1-8). IEEE.
[13] Mora, A., González, C., Arnedo-Moreno, J., & Álvarez, A. (2016, September).
Gamification of cognitive training: a crowdsourcing-inspired approach for older
adults. In Proceedings of the XVII international conference on human computer
interaction (pp. 1-8).
[14] Paletta, L., Pszeida, M., Fellner, M., Russegger, S., Dini, A., Draxler, S.,
... & Steiner, J. (2021). Towards Decision Support with Assessment of Neuropsychological Profiles in Alzheimer’s Dementia Using Playful Tablet-Based
Multimodal Activation. In Advances in Neuroergonomics and Cognitive Engineering: Proceedings of the AHFE 2021 Virtual Conferences on Neuroergonomics
and Cognitive Engineering, Industrial Cognitive Ergonomics and Engineering
Psychology, and Cognitive Computing and Internet of Things, July 25-29, 2021,
USA (pp. 469-477). Springer International Publishing.
45

[15] So, A., Hooshyar, D., Park, K. W., & Lim, H. S. (2017). Early diagnosis of
dementia from clinical data by machine learning techniques. Applied Sciences,
7(7), 651.
[16] Shankle, W. R., Mani, S., Pazzani, M. J., & Smyth, P. (1997). Detecting
very early stages of dementia from normal aging with machine learning methods.
In Artificial Intelligence in Medicine: 6th Conference on Artificial Intelligence
in Medicine Europe, AIME’97 Grenoble, France, March 23–26, 1997 Proceedings
6 (pp. 71-85). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[17] Bidani, A., Gouider, M. S., & Travieso-González, C. M. (2019). Dementia
detection and classification from MRI images using deep neural networks and
transfer learning. In Advances in Computational Intelligence: 15th International
Work-Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, IWANN 2019, Gran Canaria,
Spain, June 12-14, 2019, Proceedings, Part I 15 (pp.
925-933).
Springer
International Publishing.
[18] Murugan, S., Venkatesan, C., Sumithra, M. G., Gao, X. Z., Elakkiya, B.,
Akila, M., & Manoharan, S. (2021). DEMNET: a deep learning model for early
diagnosis of Alzheimer diseases and dementia from MR images. Ieee Access, 9,
90319-90329.
[19] Kevin S. McGrew, CHC theory and the human cognitive abilities project:
Standing on the shoulders of the giants of psychometric intelligence research,
Intelligence, Volume 37, Issue 1, 2009, Pages 1-10, ISSN 0160-2896.
[20] Funahashi S, Andreau JM. Prefrontal cortex and neural mechanisms
of executive function.
J Physiol Paris.
2013 Dec;107(6):471-82.
doi:
10.1016/j.jphysparis.2013.05.001. Epub 2013 May 15. PMID: 23684970.
[21] Heatherton TF, Wagner DD. Cognitive neuroscience of self-regulation failure.
Trends Cogn Sci. 2011 Mar;15(3):132-9. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2010.12.005. Epub
2011 Jan 26. PMID: 21273114; PMCID: PMC3062191.
[22] Gonzalez Kelso I, Tadi P. Cognitive Assessment. 2022 Nov 7. In: StatPearls
[Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2024 Jan–. PMID:
32310509.
[23] Basu, Saikat & Saha, Sudipta & Das, Sourav & Guha, Rajlaksmi & Mukherjee, Jayanta & Mahadevappa, Manjunatha. (2022). “Montaj”: A Gaming System
for Assessing Cognitive Skills in a Mobile Computing Platform. 10.1007/978-
981-19-1408-9_12.
[24] Basu, Saikat & Saha, Sudipta & Das, Sourav & Guha, Rajlaksmi & Mukherjee, Jayanta & Mahadevappa, Manjunatha. (2022). Assessment of attention and
working memory among young adults using computer games. Journal of Ambient
Intelligence and Humanized Computing. 14. 10.1007/s12652-022-04494-5.
[25] O’Shea, K., & Nash, R. (2015). An introduction to convolutional neural
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.08458.
46

[26] Aghdam, H. H., & Heravi, E. J. (2017). Guide to convolutional neural
networks. New York, NY: Springer, 10(978-973), 51.
[27] Dakdareh, S. G., & Abbasian, K. (2024). Diagnosis of Alzheimer’s Disease
and Mild Cognitive Impairment Using Convolutional Neural Networks. Journal
of Alzheimer’s Disease Reports, 8(1), 317.
[28] Kiranyaz, S., Ince, T., Abdeljaber, O., Avci, O., & Gabbouj, M. (2019,
May). 1-D convolutional neural networks for signal processing applications. In
ICASSP 2019-2019 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing (ICASSP) (pp. 8360-8364). IEEE.
[29] Kiranyaz, S., Avci, O., Abdeljaber, O., Ince, T., Gabbouj, M., & Inman,
D. J. (2021). 1D convolutional neural networks and applications: A survey.
Mechanical systems and signal processing, 151, 107398.
[30] Li, D., Zhang, J., Zhang, Q., & Wei, X. (2017, October). Classification
of ECG signals based on 1D convolution neural network. In 2017 IEEE 19th
International Conference on e-Health Networking, Applications and Services
(Healthcom) (pp. 1-6). IEEE.
[31] Mattioli, F., Porcaro, C., & Baldassarre, G. (2022). A 1D CNN for high
accuracy classification and transfer learning in motor imagery EEG-based braincomputer interface. Journal of Neural Engineering, 18(6), 066053.
[32] Li, F., Liu, M., Zhao, Y., Kong, L., Dong, L., Liu, X., & Hui, M. (2019).
Feature extraction and classification of heart sound using 1D convolutional neural
networks. EURASIP Journal on Advances in Signal Processing, 2019(1), 1-11.
[33] Allamy, S., & Koerich, A. L. (2021, December). 1D CNN architectures for
music genre classification. In 2021 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational
Intelligence (SSCI) (pp. 01-07). IEEE.
[34] Hsieh, C. H., Li, Y. S., Hwang, B. J., & Hsiao, C. H. (2020). Detection of
atrial fibrillation using 1D convolutional neural network. Sensors, 20(7), 2136.
[35] Hu, H., Shah, S. A. A., Bennamoun, M., & Molton, M. (2017, November).
2D and 3D face recognition using convolutional neural network. In TENCON
2017-2017 IEEE Region 10 Conference (pp. 133-132). IEEE.
[36] Taha, B., & Hatzinakos, D. (2019, May). Emotion recognition from 2D facial
expressions. In 2019 IEEE Canadian Conference of Electrical and Computer
Engineering (CCECE) (pp. 1-4). IEEE.
[37] Li, H., Sun, J., Xu, Z., & Chen, L. (2017). Multimodal 2D+ 3D facial
expression recognition with deep fusion convolutional neural network. IEEE
Transactions on Multimedia, 19(12), 2816-2831.
[38] TanujaPatgar, T. (2021). Convolution neural network based emotion classification cognitive modelforfacial expression. Turkish Journal of Computer and
Mathematics Education (TURCOMAT), 12(13), 6718-6739.
47

[39] Almabdy, S., & Elrefaei, L. (2019). Deep convolutional neural network-based
approaches for face recognition. Applied Sciences, 9(20), 4397.
[40] Wu, C., & Guo, F. (2021). TSNN: Three-stream combining 2D and 3D convolutional neural network for micro-expression recognition. IEEJ Transactions
on Electrical and Electronic Engineering, 16(1), 98-107.
[41] Cui, J., Zhang, H., Han, H., Shan, S., & Chen, X. (2018, February).
Improving 2D face recognition via discriminative face depth estimation. In 2018
International Conference on Biometrics (ICB) (pp. 140-147). IEEE.
[42] Li, J., Mi, Y., Li, G., & Ju, Z. (2019). CNN-based facial expression recognition from annotated rgb-d images for human–robot interaction. International
Journal of Humanoid Robotics, 16(04), 1941002.
[43] Kim, H., Jung, W. K., Park, Y. C., Lee, J. W., & Ahn, S. H. (2022).
Broken stitch detection method for sewing operation using CNN feature map
and image-processing techniques. Expert Systems with Applications, 188, 116014.
[44] Menikdiwela, M., Nguyen, C., Li, H., & Shaw, M. (2017, December). CNNbased small object detection and visualization with feature activation mapping.
In 2017 international conference on image and vision computing New Zealand
(IVCNZ) (pp. 1-5). IEEE.
[45] Singh, S., & Anand, R. S. (2019). Multimodal medical image fusion using
hybrid layer decomposition with CNN-based feature mapping and structural
clustering. IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, 69(6),
3855-3865.
[46] Guyon, I., & Elisseeff, A. (2006). An introduction to feature extraction. In
Feature extraction: foundations and applications (pp. 1-25). Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[47] Wu, B. F., & Lin, C. H. (2018). Adaptive feature mapping for customizing
deep learning based facial expression recognition model. IEEE access, 6, 12451-
12461.
[48] Ge, Z., Cao, G., Li, X., & Fu, P. (2020). Hyperspectral image classification
method based on 2D–3D CNN and multibranch feature fusion. IEEE Journal of
Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing, 13, 5776-
5788.
[49] Steurer, M., Hill, R. J., & Pfeifer, N. (2021). Metrics for evaluating the
performance of machine learning based automated valuation models. Journal of
Property Research, 38(2), 99-129.
[50] Albawi, S., Mohammed, T. A., & Al-Zawi, S. (2017, August). Understanding of a convolutional neural network. In 2017 international conference on
engineering and technology (ICET) (pp. 1-6). Ieee.
[51] Zhou, J., Gandomi, A. H., Chen, F., & Holzinger, A. (2021). Evaluating
the quality of machine learning explanations: A survey on methods and metrics.
48

Electronics, 10(5), 593.
[52] Cui, Y., Zhou, F., Wang, J., Liu, X., Lin, Y., & Belongie, S. (2017). Kernel
pooling for convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition (pp. 2921-2930).
[53] Vujović, Ž. (2021). Classification model evaluation metrics. International
Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 12(6), 599-606.
[54] Hao, W., Yizhou, W., Yaqin, L., & Zhili, S. (2020, December). The role of
activation function in CNN. In 2020 2nd International Conference on Information
Technology and Computer Application (ITCA) (pp. 429-432). IEEE.
[55] Hossin, M., & Sulaiman, M. N. (2015). A review on evaluation metrics for
data classification evaluations. International journal of data mining & knowledge
management process, 5(2), 1.
[56] Park, S., & Kwak, N. (2017). Analysis on the dropout effect in convolutional
neural networks. In Computer Vision–ACCV 2016: 13th Asian Conference
on Computer Vision, Taipei, Taiwan, November 20-24, 2016, Revised Selected
Papers, Part II 13 (pp. 189-204). Springer International Publishing.
[57] Carvalho, D. V., Pereira, E. M., & Cardoso, J. S. (2019). Machine learning
interpretability: A survey on methods and metrics. Electronics, 8(8), 832.
[58] Jin, J., Dundar, A., & Culurciello, E. (2014). Flattened convolutional neural
networks for feedforward acceleration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.5474.
[59] Bera, S., & Shrivastava, V. K. (2020). Analysis of various optimizers on
deep convolutional neural network model in the application of hyperspectral
remote sensing image classification. International Journal of Remote Sensing,
41(7), 2664-2683.
[60] Jha, S., Kumar, R., Abdel-Basset, M., Priyadarshini, I., Sharma, R., &
Long, H. V. (2019). Deep learning approach for software maintainability metrics
prediction. Ieee Access, 7, 61840-61855.
[61] Marcus, D. S., Fotenos, A. F., Csernansky, J. G., Morris, J. C., & Buckner,
R. L. (2010). Open access series of imaging studies: longitudinal MRI data
in nondemented and demented older adults. Journal of cognitive neuroscience,
22(12), 2677-2684.
[62] Marom, N. D., Rokach, L., & Shmilovici, A. (2010, November). Using
the confusion matrix for improving ensemble classifiers. In 2010 IEEE 26-th
Convention of Electrical and Electronics Engineers in Israel (pp. 000555-000559).
IEEE.
[63] Wattanasoontorn, V., Hernández, R. J. G., & Sbert, M. (2014). Serious
games for e-health care. Simulations, Serious Games and Their Applications,
127-146.
49

[64] Kato, P. M. (2010). Video games in health care: Closing the gap. Review
of general psychology, 14(2), 113-121.
[65] Abd-Alrazaq, A., Abuelezz, I., Hassan, A., AlSammarraie, A., Alhuwail, D.,
Irshaidat, S., ... & Househ, M. (2022). Artificial Intelligence–Driven Serious
Games in Health Care: Scoping Review. JMIR serious games, 10(4), e39840.
[66] Raja, B. S., & Asghar, S. (2020). Disease classification in health care systems
with game theory approach. IEEE Access, 8, 83298-83311.
[67] Graafland, M., & Schijven, M. (2018). How serious games will improve
healthcare. Digital health: scaling healthcare to the world, 139-157.
[68] Ahmad, S., Mehmood, F., Khan, F., & Whangbo, T. K. (2022). Architecting intelligent smart serious games for healthcare applications: a technical
perspective. Sensors, 22(3), 810.
[69] Savareh, B. A., & Bashiri, A. (2021). Artificial intelligence and Mobile
Gaming. Journal of Biomedical Physics & Engineering, 11.
[70] Sitterding, M. C., Raab, D. L., Saupe, J. L., & Israel, K. J. (2019). Using
artificial intelligence and gaming to improve new nurse transition. Nurse Leader,
17(2), 125-130.
[71] Damaševičius, R., Maskeli¯unas, R., & Blažauskas, T. (2023). Serious games
and gamification in healthcare: a meta-review. Information, 14(2), 105.
[72] https://www.pexels.com/, Last Access Date: 15.03.2024.
[73] https://create.vista.com/, Last Access Date: 15.03.2024.
[74] https://images.google.com/, Last Access Date: 15.03.2024.
[75] https://www.shutterstock.com/, Last Access Date: 15.03.2024.
50
