FindingEmo: An Image Dataset for Emotion
Recognition in the Wild
Laurent Mertens1,2
Elahe’ Yargholi3
Hans Op de Beeck3
Jan Van den Stock4
Joost Vennekens1,2,5
1KU Leuven, De Nayer Campus, Dept. of Computer Science
J.-P. De Nayerlaan 5, 2860 Sint-Katelijne-Waver, Belgium
2 Leuven.AI - KU Leuven Institute for AI, 3000 Leuven, Belgium
3Department of Brain and Cognition, Leuven Brain Institute,
Faculty of Psychology & Educational Sciences
KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium
4Neuropsychiatry, Leuven Brain Institute
KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium
5Flanders Make@KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium
laurent.mertens@kuleuven.be
Abstract
We introduce FindingEmo, a new image dataset containing annotations for 25k
images, specifically tailored to Emotion Recognition. Contrary to existing datasets,
it focuses on complex scenes depicting multiple people in various naturalistic,
social settings, with images being annotated as a whole, thereby going beyond
the traditional focus on faces or single individuals. Annotated dimensions include
Valence, Arousal and Emotion label, with annotations gathered using Prolific.
Together with the annotations, we release the list of URLs pointing to the original
images, as well as all associated source code.
1
Introduction
Computer vision has known an explosive growth over the past decade, most notably due to the
resurgence of Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs). For many vision-related tasks, computer models
have been developed that match or exceed human performance, e.g., image classification [1] and
mammographic screening [2]. Many of these tasks, however, are relatively simplistic in nature:
detecting the absence or presence of an object, or naming an item in the picture. When it comes
to more complex tasks, Artificial Intelligence (AI) still has a long way to go. Affective Computing
[3], a field that combines disciplines such as computer science and cognitive psychology to study
human affect and attempt to make computers understand emotions, is an example of such a complex
problem. This paper is concerned in particular with the subtask of Emotion Recognition, i.e., building
AI models to recognize the emotional state of individuals, in our case from pictures. This problem
has many applications, ranging from psychology [4], to human- computer interaction [5], to robotics
[6]. It is, however, complex: in the field of psychology, the concept of what an emotion is exactly
is heavily debated [7, 8, 9], resulting in several ways of describing emotions, either by means of
continuous dimensions [10, 11], or by means of labels, with different competing label classification
schemes existing [12, 13, 14].
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2402.01355v2  [cs.CV]  5 Jun 2024

The application of computer vision techniques toward Emotion Recognition has historically largely
focused on detecting emotions from human facial expressions, with the problem still being actively
investigated [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21]. However, the importance of context in emotion recognition
is increasingly being acknowledged in psychology [22, 23]. This led to the release of the computer
vision dataset EMOTIC [24], presenting photos of people in natural settings, rather than face-focused
close-ups, and leading the way to more complex ANN systems that attempt to combine multiple
information streams extracted from these images [25, 26, 27].
Figure
1:
An
image
from
the
FindingEmo
dataset. Photo courtesy The Kitcheners (https://
thekitcheners.co.uk/).
Nevertheless, even these more recent efforts
focus on the emotional state of one particular individual within the picture. In this
paper, we present the FindingEmo dataset,
which is the first to target higher-order social
cognition. Each image in the dataset depicts
multiple people in a specific social setting,
and has been annotated for the overall emotional content of the entire scene, instead of
focusing on a single individual. We hope this
data can be used by AI practitioners and psychologists alike to further the understanding
of Emotion Recognition, and more broadly,
Social Cognition. This is a complex process,
consisting of many layers. Consider, e.g.,
the photograph depicted in Figure 1. Looking only at the bride’s face, one could easily
assume she is very sad, or even distressed.
Taking also her wedding gown into account,
a positive setting is suddenly suggested; perhaps her tears are tears of joy? Only when looking at the full picture does it become clear that the
bride is overcome with emotion in a positive way, as conveyed by the setting, the groom reading a
prepared text and the clearly supportive bystanders. Thus, full understanding of the bride’s emotional
state requires the full scene, including the groom and the solemnly smiling bystanders. This example
illustrates how Social Cognition involves detection of relevant elements, extracting relations among
these and attributing meaning to construct a coherent whole.
The source code for the scraper and annotation interface used to create the dataset are available from
our dedicated repository1, together with the URLs of the annotated images and their corresponding
annotations. To mitigate the issue of broken URLs, we provide multiple URLs for a same image
whenever possible, and are continuously expanding the set of images for which multiple URLs are
provided (about 10k so far). For copyright reasons, we do not share the images themselves. More
information with regard to legal compliance can be found in §A.2.
The data collection process was approved by the KU Leuven Ethics Committee.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 the data collection process and dataset
are described in detail. Next, baseline results for emotion classification and valence and arousal
regression problems based on popular ImageNet ANN architectures, as well as Visual Transformers
CLIP and DINOv2, are presented in Section 3. We build upon this by investigating the effect of
merging the features and predictions of several models in Section 4. Finally, we conclude with a
discussion in Section 5.
2
Dataset Description
The dataset is split into a publicly released set of annotations for 25,869 unique images, and a privately
kept set of 1,525 images2. Each image depicts multiple people in various, naturalistic, social settings.
We follow Emotic [24] in creating a training (=our public) set with one annotation per image, and
a test (=our private) set with multiple annotations per image. In total, 655 participants—a short
1https://gitlab.com/EAVISE/lme/findingemo
2This set is kept private to allow us to use it as a test set for dedicated workshops organized at a later date.
2

description of whom can be found in §A.8—contributed annotations. In what follows, we list the
most important annotation dimensions; for a full list, see §A.3.
Valence and Arousal
We used Russell’s continuous Valence and Arousal dimensions [10], with integer scales [−3, −2, . . . , 3] for Valence and [0, 1, . . . , 6] for Arousal. Arousal was named “Intensity”
in our annotation interface, as we felt “Arousal” might carry a sexual connotation for some users.
Figure 2: Plutchik’s Wheel of Emotions.
Emotion
Users had to pick an emotion from
Plutchik’s discrete Wheel of Emotions (PWoE)
[13], shown in Figure 2.
We opted for this
particular emotion classification scheme as it
strikes a balance between the more limited and
sometimes contested Ekman’s 6 [12], and the
more expansive, and potentially more confusing, Geneva Emotion Wheel [14]. It defines 24
primary emotions, grouped into 8 groups of 3,
with emotions within a group differing in intensity. It is depicted as a flower with the 24
emotions organized in 8 leaves and 3 concentric
rings. Each leaf represents a group of 3, with
opposite leaves representing opposite emotions.
The rings represent the intensity levels, from
most intense at the center to least intense at the
outside. An additional advantage of PWoE is
that one can easily opt to use all 24 emotions,
or instead limit oneself to the 8 groups, allowing some granularity control. We refer to these
choices as “Emo24” and “Emo8” respectively,
and refer to the groups as “emotion leaves”.
2.1
Positioning Versus Existing Datasets
Although research in automated Emotion Recognition has been gaining in popularity over the years,
progress is still hampered by a lack of data. Earlier work tended to focus solely on recognizing
emotions from faces. In their recent review paper, [28] list no less than 21 publicly available datasets
of facial images for this purpose, typically annotated with Ekman’s 6, potentially extended with a
“neutral” category, or custom defined emotion categories. Some of the more popular such datasets,
like JAFFE [29] and CK+ [30], make use of a limited number of actors (10 for JAFFE, 123 for CK+)
who were instructed to act out a certain emotion, resulting in caricatural emotional expressions.
Publicly available datasets going beyond the face are few in number. First, there is EMOTIC [24], a
23,571 image dataset depicting people in the wild, and with natural expressiveness. An explicit goal
of EMOTIC is to take context into account when assessing a person’s emotional state. One or more
individual subjects are delineated by a bounding box in each picture for a total of 34,320 subjects,
each annotated for Valence, Arousal, Dominance and one of 26 custom defined emotion categories.
CAER-S is a dataset of 70,000 stills taken from 79 TV shows. The stills were extracted from 13,201
video clips that were annotated for Ekman’s 6 + neutral. Each still contains at least one visible face.
The aim of the dataset is to allow augmenting facial emotion recognition with contextual features.
Similar to EMOTIC, there is HECO, a dataset of 9,385 images taken from previously released Human-
Object Interaction datasets, films and the internet. Like EMOTIC, 19,781 individual subjects were
annotated in the pictures for Valence, Arousal, Dominance, 8 discrete emotion categories comprised
of Ekman’s 6 + Excitement and Peace, and two novel dimensions, Self-assurance and Catharsis.
Table 1 groups these dataset descriptions, together with ours, for easy comparison.
3

Table 1: Comparison of relevant datasets. “V/A/D” indicates which of the Valence, Arousal and
Dominance dimensions were annotated.
Name
Nb. images
Image source
Annotation target
V/A/D
Emotions scheme
Reference
EMOTIC
23,571
COCO + Ade20k + internet
Single person
V/A/D
26 custom emotion categories
[24]
CAER-S
70,000
TV Shows
Single person (face visible)
–
Ekman’s 6 + neutral
[31]
HECO
9,385
HICO-DET + V-COCO +
film + internet
Single person
V/A/D
Ekman’s 6 + Excitement
and Peace
[27]
FindingEmo
25,869
Internet
Whole image
V/A
Plutchik’s Wheel of Emotions
This paper
2.2
Dataset Creation Process
The creation of the dataset was split into two phases. The first phase focused on gathering a large set
of images, prioritizing quantity over quality. The second phase consisted of collecting the annotations.
We present a brief summary of both phases here, and refer to §A.4 for more details.
Phase 1
Images were gathered using a custom built image scraper that generates random search
queries, each consisting of three terms selected from predefined lists of, respectively, emotions, social
settings/environments, and age groups of people (e.g., ‘adults’, ‘seniors’, etc.). For each query, the
first N results were retrieved, filtered and downloaded. In total 1,041,105 images were collected.
Phase 2
Annotations were gathered using a custom web interface (see §A.5 for a screenshot).
Annotators were recruited through the Prolific3 platform, and first required to agree to an Informed
Consent clause, followed by detailed instructions (see §A.6 for a copy). To monitor the process
closely, we performed many (51, to be exact) runs, each with a limited number (around 10 to 15) of
participants. For each run, the Prolific user selection criteria were the same: fluent English speaker,
(self-reported) neurotypical, and a 50/50 split male/female. Candidates were informed of a total
expected task duration of 1h, and offered a £10 reward. Analysis of the durations (see §A.7) show
our time estimation to be fair. In total, data collection costs were £10k, including fees and taxes.
2.3
Annotator Grading and Annotator Overlap
To assess the reliability of annotators, we used a set of 5 fixed images, referred to as “fixed overlap
images”, chosen specifically for being unambiguous.4 For each image, a default annotation was
defined consisting of the “keep/reject” choice (4 keeps, 1 reject), Valence (value range), Arousal
(value range) and Emotion (emotion leaf). This results in 4 datapoints per image, or 20 datapoints
in total. Annotators’ submissions for these images were compared to the reference, earning 1/20
point per matching datapoint, resulting in a final “overlap score” s ∈[0, 1]. Users with s >= 0.8
were automatically accepted. An alternative score salt was computed which ignored those overlap
images whose reference value was “keep”, but were annotated as “reject”. The reason for this is
that it quickly became clear that despite the system providing a “Skip” option in case users rather
not annotate a certain image, some chose to “reject” these images instead. Also, one of the “keep”
images shows a bit of text, which users were instructed to reject. Some users were more strict than
others in applying this rule.
We defined a system parameter pR that controls when overlap images (i.e., images already annotated
by others) are shown to users. For each new image request, an overlap image is served with probability
pR, starting with the 5 fixed overlap images, in a fixed sequence. Once these are annotated, the
system serves other, non-fixed, already annotated images. At first, these were randomly chosen from
all annotated images, but this resulted in too many images with only 2 annotations. Hence, we created
a process that limits the pool of images to choose from, and attempts to strive for 5 annotations
per (non-fixed) overlap image. Using this system, we obtained a dataset with 80.9/19.1 split single
label/multi-label annotations. These multi-label images make up the private set. Detailed interannotator statistics on this private set are reported in §A.9, indicating that for 26.2% of the images,
all annotators agreed on the emotion leaf, while for 46.6% of the images two labels were given.
Out of these two-label annotations, 42.8% refer to adjacent emotion leafs. Annotators agree less on
3https://www.prolific.com/
4This amounts to an average of 10% of the shown images, similar to Emotic [24] who “randomly [inserted] 2
control images in every annotation batch of 20 images”.
4

Arousal (average min-max difference of 2.7 ± 1.4) than on Valence (average min-max difference of
1.8 ± 1.2). Importantly, average Valence disagreement plateaus close to 2 with increasing number of
annotations per image, while a linearely increasing trend is apparent for Arousal.
2.4
Statistics and Observations
This section presents statistics for the 8 leaves of PWoE. For the full 24 emotions, see §A.10.
Figure 3: Distribution of Emotion annotations for
the public set per Plutchik emotion leaf.
Figure 3 shows the distribution of annotations
per emotion leaf.
An imbalance is obvious,
with in particular “joy” and “anticipation” being
overrepresented, and “surprise” and “disgust”
heavily underrepresented, despite an added balancing mechanism (see §A.4.2). A similar imbalance is found in popular facial expression
datasets, such as FER2013 [32] (only 600 “disgust” images versus nearly 5,000 for other Ekman’s 6 labels) and AffectNet [33] (134,915
“happy” faces, 25,959 “sad” faces, 14,590 “surprise” faces, 4,303 “disgust” faces). Although
EMOTIC [24] uses custom emotion labels, making a one-to-one comparison more difficult, it
is also heavily skewed towards positive labels
(top 3: “engagement”, “happiness” and “anticipation”; bottom 3: “aversion”, “pain” and “embarassement”). Compared to these other datasets, ours
exhibits less imbalance.
Figure 4:
Association between Valence and
Arousal values. The bigger the disc, the more often
the (Valence, Arousal)-pair appears in the dataset.
In Table 2, we group average annotation values
for Arousal, Valence and Ambiguity. As expected, perceived “negative” emotions (“fear”,
“sadness”, “disgust” and “anger”) have a negative average Valence, with the inverse being true
for “positive” emotions (“joy”, “trust”). Somewhat undecided are “surprise” and “anticipation”, which can go either way. The highest
Arousal values are reserved for “anger, “sadness”
and “fear”. We hypothesize the unexpectedly
high Arousal value for “sadness” might be due
to naming this dimension “Intensity” in our interface; although a grieving person is generally
considered to have low arousal, the emotion of
sadness itself is felt intensely. Further analysis
on the full emotion set reported in §A.10 verifies
that also at this more fine-grained level, annotations conform to expectations, with Arousal
levels increasing along with the intensity level of
the PWoE ring, and Valence levels analogously
increasing for “positive” and decreasing for “negative” emotions.
Table 2: Average Arousal, Valence and Ambiguity annotation values for the public set, per Plutchik
emotion leaf. Format xy: x = average, y = standard deviation.
Joy
Trust
Fear
Surprise
Sadness
Disgust
Anger
Anticipation
Nb.
7026
3549
2401
888
2665
1000
2439
5901
Arousal
2.960.96
2.571.09
3.241.24
2.571.41
3.421.29
2.441.23
3.591.17
2.461.21
Valence
1.900.96
1.411.09
−1.341.24
0.481.41
−1.571.29
−0.881.23
−1.581.17
0.561.21
Ambiguity
1.581.66
1.881.64
2.091.61
2.391.68
1.841.66
2.221.65
1.991.63
2.151.61
Figure 4 shows the association between Arousal and Valence annotations, indicating as expected a
collinearity between higher Arousal values and the extremes of the Valence range.
5

3
Baseline Model Results
Baseline results are obtained by applying transfer learning to popular ImageNet-based ANN architectures AlexNet [34], VGG16 [35], ResNet 18, 50 and 101 [36] and DenseNet 161 [37].5 For each, we
use the default PyTorch implementations and weights, and replace the last layer with a new output
layer that matches the chosen task (see below). Only this last layer is trained. We do the same
experiment for some of these same architectures trained from scratch on the Places365 dataset [38],
using the official PyTorch models. We also consider EmoNet [39], a model for labeling images with
one out of 20 custom emotion labels reflecting the emotion elicited in the observer, obtained by
applying transfer learning to AlexNet and trained on a private database. In this case, we first process
the image with EmoNet, and then send the resulting 20-feature vector through a new linear layer. We
use the EmoNet PyTorch port by the main author6. Lastly, we also use Visual Transformer models
CLIP [40] (ViT-B/32) and DINOv2 [41] (ViT-B/14 distilled with registers)7, using both models to
obtain embeddings for input images, and like with EmoNet, use these as input to a single linear layer.
We distinguish three tasks: Emo8 classification, where we predict one of the 8 primary emotions
defined by the emotion leaves of PWoE; Arousal regression, where we predict the numerical arousal
value; Valence regression, where we predict the numerical valence value.
Figure 5: Test data baseline performance on the Emo8 classification and Arousal and Valence
regression tasks. Metrics are: Weighted F1 (W.F1) and Average Precision (AP) for classification,
and Mean Absolute Error (MAE) and Spearman R correlation coefficient (S.R) for regression. The
starting learning rate and loss corresponding to each model are displayed above the training bars.
(U)CE = (Unbalanced)CrossEntropyLoss, (W)MSE = (Weighted)MeanSquaredError loss, p365 =
original model trained on Places365 dataset.
For classification, we apply a softmax to the output of the final layer. Target values for regression
problems are reduced to the range [0, 1] using an appropriate linear rescaling. Hence, we apply a
sigmoid function to the model output. Network outputs are transformed back to the original problem
domain by using the inverse scaling.
Preprocessing for ImageNet models consisted in scaling images to an 800x600 resolution, keeping
the original ratio and centering and padding with black borders where necessary, followed by
normalization using default ImageNet pixel means and standard deviations. For Places365 and
EmoNet models, we followed the preprocessing steps described in the respective papers. For CLIP,
we use the default preprocessing chain that comes with the model, and for DINOv2 we use the same
preprocessing as for the ImageNet models, but with a rescaling to 798x602.
5Our GitLab repository contains all logs used to generate all reported results, and includes additional results
for models like VGG19, ResNet34 and DenseNet121, that were in line with other same-architecture models.
6https://gitlab.com/EAVISE/lme/emonet
7More specifically the ‘Pretrained heads for image classification’,
loaded in PyTorch using
torch.hub.load(‘facebookresearch/dinov2’, ‘dinov2_vitb14_reg_lc’). We also experimented
with the smaller vits14 variant, obtaining results typically a few percentage points behind the vitb14 model.
6

For each task,
and each model,
we trained 10 models per starting learning rate lr0
and per loss function L.
For classification, we used lr0
∈
[10−1, 10−2, 10−3, 10−4]
and L
∈
[CrossEntropyLoss, UnbalancedCrossEntropyLoss]; for regression we used lr0
∈
[10−3, 10−4, 10−5, 10−6, 10−7] and L ∈[MSELoss, WeightedMSELoss]. UnbalancedCrossEntropyLoss is a novel extension of the traditional CrossEntropyLoss, created to allow giving different
weights to different misclassifications. WeightedMSELoss is a natural extension of MSELoss that
takes into account class imbalance. Full technical details for both can be found in §A.11.
All experiments use the public dataset, Adam loss with default PyTorch parameter values, and the
custom lr update rule lre = lr0/√
(e//3)+1, with lre the learning rate at epoch e. By virtue of the floor
division (//), this means we update the learning rate once every 3 epochs. The data was randomly
split 80/20 train/test, making sure that each target label was also split according to this same rule.
Reported metrics are:
for classification, Average Precision (AP)—as computed using the
scikit-learn package—and Weighted F1 (W.F1); for regression, Mean Average Error (MAE)
computed in the original problem domain, and Spearman Rank Correlation (S.R). Training stopped
when either the epoch with the best loss (or the best W.F1 score for classification) on the test set lies 6
epochs behind the current epoch, or 250 epochs were reached, with the corresponding best model put
forward as the final trained model. Only results for the (lr0, L)-combination yielding the best average
Weighted F1 or Mean Average Error performance over the corresponding 10 models are reported.
All our experiments were implemented in Python using PyTorch, and split over an Intel Xeon W-2145
workstation with 32GB RAM and two nVidia GeForce RTX 3060 GPUs with 12GB VRAM, and
an Intel i7-12800HX laptop with 32GB RAM and an nVidia GeForce RTX 3060 Laptop GPU with
12GB VRAM. Test results are plotted in Figure 5, with the graph for train data, and tables containing
the numerical results grouped in §A.12. In order to speed up training, we buffered model activations
whenever possible.8
Apparent from these results is that these are hard problems. ImageNet-trained models slightly outperform their Places365-trained counterparts. This suggests that the natural object features extracted
from the ImageNet dataset are more salient toward emotion recognition than are place-related features.
In 9 out of 13 cases, our UnbalancedCrossEntropyLoss has the edge over regular CrossEntropyLoss.
Predicting Arousal appears more difficult than predicting Valence, which aligns with lesser annotator
agreement for Arousal than Valence, as analyzed in §A.9. As for the architectures, VGG is a clear
winner, with ResNet second. Although twice as large, ResNet101 performs very similar to ResNet50.
The larger depth of the DenseNet model does not translate in better performance. A breakdown of
model performance per Emo8 class can be found in §A.12, showing overall best performance on
‘Joy’ and ‘Anger’. Worst performance is registered for ‘Surprise’ and ‘Disgust’, which perhaps not
surprisingly are also the emotions for which the least annotations are available.
Interestingly, as explored in §A.14, when a model deviates from the target Emo8 annotation there is a
strong tendency toward “nearby” emotions. Most often this is the adjacent leaf, with more distant
leaves increasingly more unlikely. This behavior is reminiscent of the kind of disagreements we find
among our human annotators.
4
Beyond the Baseline
To build upon the baseline established in §3, we built multi-stream models by applying the popular
technique of late fusion [24, 25, 26, 27]. This section reports results for Emo8 classification; the
analogous discussion for Arousal and Valence regression can be found in §A.13.
We consider the following streams for combinations: Emo8 predictions: for each considered architecture, we trained an Emo8 model, and took the predictions from this model as an 8-feature vector;
Baseline features: we take the model features from the penultimate layer. Vector size depends on the
architecture; EmoNet predictions: applying the model gives us a 20-feature vector (see §3); YoLo
v3 trained on Open Images + Facial Emotion Recognition (OIToFER): we apply YoLo v39 [42],
using LightNet [43], to each image and extract the detected “Human face” regions with probablity
p > 0.005. We then apply the FER2013-trained ResNet18 model by X. Yuan10 to the extracted faces,
8I.e., we precomputed the output of the frozen part of the model, and stored it on disk for easy reuse.
9We used the Open Images weights available from https://pjreddie.com/darknet/yolo/.
10https://github.com/LetheSec/Fer2013-Facial-Emotion-Recognition-Pytorch
7

Figure 6: Test data results for extensions beyond the baseline by applying late fusion with Facial
Emotion Recognition predictions (OIToFER), EmoNet predictions (EmoNet) and Places365 (P365)
predictions or features. For all models, predictions on the dataset (Emo8) are concatenated and sent
through a linear layer, except when ‘(f)’ is shown, indicating model features are concatenated. The
starting learning rate corresponding to each model is displayed above the training bars.
resulting in a 7-feature vector per face. We generate two 7-feature vectors from this, one containing
the vector averages, the other the standard deviations, and concatenate both to obtain a final 14-feature
vector; Places365 ResNet18 predictions: applying the ResNet18 model trained on the Places365
dataset gives us a 365-feature vector per image; Places365 ResNet18 features: we take the model
activations from the penultimate layer, giving us a 512-feature vector.
The experimental setup is identical to §3, except that for time considerations, we only consider
CrossEntropyLoss.11 The test results for Emo8 classification are shown in Figure 6. Training
results, as well as numerical training and test results, are included in §A.13. A first observation
is that improving upon the baseline appears non-trivial; except for VGG16, the obtained gains are
modest. Second, the highest gains clearly come from adding facial emotion features. Third, even
though adding EmoNet and OIToFER features separately has a positive effect for VGG16, adding
both together does not result in a compounded improvement. Fourth, the added dimensionality of
concatening features instead of predictions in the case of Places365 does not result in markedly
different results, in some cases even leading to worse results. Finally, not a single stream combination
resulted in improved performance for CLIP and DINOv2, with the best VGG16 results nearing
CLIP/DINOv2 performance.
5
Discussion
Findings
The analysis of our dataset shows the annotations to conform to expectations, with
Valence and Arousal values following the expected trends. Furthermore, when annotators disagree
on the emotion label, they tend to choose nearby emotions in PWoE nonetheless. Our experiments
show that, for the Emo8 prediction task on our dataset, modern ViT models do not seem to really
outperform older CNN architectures, with VGG16 even (slightly) outperforming DINOv2 when both
baselines are augmented with Facial Emotion features. For Arousal and Valence prediction however,
the ViT models are clearly superior.
Limitations
1) While images in our private set have multiple annotations, we have followed the
approach of Emotic [24] and gathered only a single annotation per image in our public set. This
choice has allowed us to gather a larger data set, but may cause concerns about reliability. These
concerns are alleviated by the clear tendency observed on the private set toward similar emotions
in case of multiple labels (§A.9), combined with trained models exhibiting this same tendency to
strongly favor nearby emotion leaves when deviating from the annotation (§A.14). In short: the
11Indeed, our UnbalancedCrossEntropyLoss code is not yet optimized, and slower than CrossEntropyLoss.
8

models trained using single annotations showed similar statistics to the human multi-label annotations.
2) Concerning potential biases in the images themselves, as they were scraped from the internet
the dataset inherits the same biases the internet exhibits. In particular, we have not performed any
analysis concerning potential representation issues. As such, there is an unverified possibility that
models trained on our dataset wrongly associate “negative” emotions more strongly with certain
minority groups. 3) Since legal issues (see §A.2) prevent us from sharing the actual images, we had
to resort to sharing URLs. While URLs can break, we mitigate this risk by offering multiple different
URLs for the same image where possible.
Impact Statement
This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field of Machine Learning,
Psychology and Psychiatry. Our own interest lies with non-commercial applications with respect to
the understanding of Emotion Recognition and Social Cognition in individuals, and how these can be
affected by neurological conditions. In particular, we hope that our (future) work will be of help in
assisting people with impaired Social Cognition to navigate life.
Nevertheless, the data, and possible future Machine Learning advances inspired by it, could very well
lead to commercial (e.g., personalized ads tailored to one’s mood) and surveillance (e.g., general
crowd monitoring, detection of aggression within crowds, etc.) applications that we strongly feel
warrant a public debate with regard to their desirability, and even legality.
Conclusion
We present FindingEmo, a dataset of 25k image annotations for Emotion Recognition
that goes beyond the traditional focus on faces or single individuals, and is the first to target higherorder social cognition. The dataset creation process has been discussed in detail, and the annotations
have been shown to align with expectations. Baseline results are presented for Emotion, Arousal and
Valence prediction, as well as first steps to go beyond the baseline. These results show the dataset to
be complex, and the tasks hard, with even modern models like CLIP and DINOv2 struggling. This
suggests that in order to solve these tasks, novel Machine Learning roads might need to be explored.
Our annotation interface and code for model training are made open source.
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
This work was funded by KU Leuven grant IDN/21/010.
We are grateful to dr. Simon Vandevelde for providing us with the dataset name.
References
[1] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing human-level
performance on imagenet classification,” arXiv.org, 2015.
[2] S. M. McKinney, M. Sieniek, V. Godbole, J. Godwin, N. Antropova, H. Ashrafian, T. Back,
M. Chesus, G. C. Corrado, A. Darzi, M. Etemadi, F. Garcia-Vicente, F. J. Gilbert, M. Halling-
Brown, D. Hassabis, S. Jansen, A. Karthikesalingam, C. J. Kelly, D. King, J. R. Ledsam,
D. Melnick, H. Mostofi, L. Peng, J. J. Reicher, B. Romera-Paredes, R. Sidebottom, M. Suleyman,
D. Tse, K. C. Young, J. De Fauw, and S. Shetty, “International evaluation of an ai system for
breast cancer screening,” Nature (London), vol. 577, no. 7788, pp. 89–94, 2020.
[3] R. W. Picard, Affective computing.
Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 1997.
[4] R. Cowie, E. Douglas-Cowie, N. Tsapatsoulis, G. Votsis, S. Kollias, W. Fellenz, and J. Taylor,
“Emotion recognition in human-computer interaction,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine,
vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 32–80, 2001.
[5] A. Emanuel and E. Eldar, “Emotions as computations,” Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews,
vol. 144, p. 104977, 2023.
[6] M. Spezialetti, G. Placidi, and S. Rossi, “Emotion recognition for human-robot interaction:
Recent advances and future perspectives,” Frontiers in Robotics and AI, vol. 7, 2020.
[7] L. F. Barrett, “Discrete emotions or dimensions? the role of valence focus and arousal focus,”
Cognition and Emotion, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 579–599, 1998.
[8] L. F. Barrett, M. Gendron, and Y.-M. Huang, “Do discrete emotions exist?” Philosophical
Psychology, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 427–437, 2009.
9

[9] E. Harmon-Jones, C. Harmon-Jones, and E. Summerell, “On the importance of both dimensional
and discrete models of emotion,” Behavioral Sciences, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 66–, 2017.
[10] J. A. Russell, “A circumplex model of affect,” Journal of personality and social psychology,
vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 1161–1178, 1980.
[11] A. Mehrabian, “Pleasure-arousal-dominance: A general framework for describing and measuring individual differences in temperament,” Current Psychology: A Journal for Diverse
Perspectives on Diverse Psychological Issues, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 261–292, 1996.
[12] P. Ekman, “Universal facial expressions of emotion,” California Mental Health Research Digest,
vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 151–158, 1970.
[13] R. Plutchik, “A general psychoevolutionary theory of emotion,” 1980.
[14] K. R. Scherer, “What are emotions? and how can they be measured?” SOCIAL SCIENCE
INFORMATION SUR LES SCIENCES SOCIALES, vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 695–729, 2005.
[15] Y.-I. Tian, T. Kanade, and J. Cohn, “Recognizing action units for facial expression analysis,”
IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 97–115,
2001.
[16] G. Zhao and M. Pietikainen, “Dynamic texture recognition using local binary patterns with
an application to facial expressions,” IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine
intelligence, vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 915–928, 2007.
[17] S. Zhang, X. Zhao, and B. Lei, “Robust facial expression recognition via compressive sensing,”
Sensors (Basel, Switzerland), vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 3747–3761, 2012.
[18] F. Zhang, T. Zhang, Q. Mao, and C. Xu, “Joint pose and expression modeling for facial
expression recognition,” in 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition.
IEEE, 2018, pp. 3359–3368.
[19] J. Zhu, B. Luo, S. Zhao, S. Ying, X. Zhao, and X. Zhao, “Iexpressnet: Facial expression
recognition with incremental classes,” in MM 2020 - Proceedings of the 28th ACM International
Conference on Multimedia, 2020, pp. 2899–2908.
[20] S. Zhang, Z. Huang, D. P. Paudel, and L. Van Gool, “Facial emotion recognition with noisy
multi-task annotations.”
IEEE, 2021.
[21] Z. Y. Huang, C. C. Chiang, J. H. Chen, Y. C. Chen, H. L. Chung, Y. P. Cai, and H. C. Hsu, “A
study on computer vision for facial emotion recognition,” Scientific reports, vol. 13, no. 1, pp.
8425–8425, 2023.
[22] H. Aviezer, Y. Trope, and A. Todorov, “Body cues, not facial expressions, discriminate between
intense positive and negative emotions,” Science, vol. 338, no. 6111, pp. 1225–1229, 2012.
[23] F. Kumfor, A. Ibañez, R. Hutchings, J. L. Hazelton, J. R. Hodges, and O. Piguet, “Beyond the
face: how context modulates emotion processing in frontotemporal dementia subtypes,” Brain,
vol. 141, no. 4, pp. 1172–1185, 01 2018.
[24] R. Kosti, J. M. Alvarez, A. Recasens, and A. Lapedriza, “Context based emotion recognition
using emotic dataset,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2019,
arXiv:2003.13401 [cs].
[25] T. Mittal, P. Guhan, U. Bhattacharya, R. Chandra, A. Bera, and D. Manocha, “Emoticon:
Context-aware multimodal emotion recognition using frege’s principle,” in 2020 IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020.
[26] S. Thuseethan, S. Rajasegarar, and J. Yearwood, “Emosec: Emotion recognition from scene
context,” Neurocomputing, vol. 492, pp. 174–187, 2022.
[27] D. Yang, S. Huang, S. Wang, Y. Liu, P. Zhai, L. Su, M. Li, and L. Zhang, “Emotion recognition
for multiple context awareness,” in Computer Vision – ECCV 2022, S. Avidan, G. Brostow,
M. Cissé, G. M. Farinella, and T. Hassner, Eds.
Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland, 2022, pp.
144–162.
[28] S. K. Khare, V. Blanes-Vidal, E. S. Nadimi, and U. R. Acharya, “Emotion recognition and
artificial intelligence: A systematic review (2014–2023) and research recommendations,” Information Fusion, vol. 102, p. 102019, 2024.
10

[29] M. Lyons, S. Akamatsu, M. Kamachi, and J. Gyoba, “Coding facial expressions with gabor
wavelets,” in Proceedings - 3rd IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture
Recognition, FG 1998.
IEEE, 1998, pp. 200–205.
[30] P. Lucey, J. F. Cohn, T. Kanade, J. Saragih, Z. Ambadar, and I. Matthews, “The extended cohnkanade dataset (ck+): A complete dataset for action unit and emotion-specified expression,”
in 2010 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition -
Workshops.
IEEE, 2010, pp. 94–101.
[31] J. Lee, S. Kim, S. Kim, J. Park, and K. Sohn, “Context-aware emotion recognition networks,”
in 2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2019, pp. 10 142–
10 151.
[32] I. J. Goodfellow, D. Erhan, P. Luc Carrier, A. Courville, M. Mirza, B. Hamner, W. Cukierski,
Y. Tang, D. Thaler, D.-H. Lee, Y. Zhou, C. Ramaiah, F. Feng, R. Li, X. Wang, D. Athanasakis,
J. Shawe-Taylor, M. Milakov, J. Park, R. Ionescu, M. Popescu, C. Grozea, J. Bergstra, J. Xie,
L. Romaszko, B. Xu, Z. Chuang, and Y. Bengio, “Challenges in representation learning: A
report on three machine learning contests,” Neural networks, vol. 64, pp. 59–63, 2015.
[33] A. Mollahosseini, B. Hasani, and M. H. Mahoor, “Affectnet: A database for facial expression,
valence, and arousal computing in the wild,” IEEE transactions on affective computing, vol. 10,
no. 1, pp. 18–31, 2019.
[34] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classification with deep convolutional
neural networks,” Commun. ACM, vol. 60, no. 6, p. 84–90, may 2017.
[35] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
recognition,” in 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015, San
Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings, Y. Bengio and Y. LeCun, Eds.,
2015.
[36] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image recognition,” in 2016
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016, pp. 770–778.
[37] G. Huang, Z. Liu, L. Van Der Maaten, and K. Q. Weinberger, “Densely connected convolutional
networks,” in 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
2017, pp. 2261–2269.
[38] B. Zhou, A. Lapedriza, A. Khosla, A. Oliva, and A. Torralba, “Places: A 10 million image
database for scene recognition,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2017.
[39] P. A. Kragel, M. C. Reddan, K. S. LaBar, and T. D. Wager, “Emotion schemas are embedded in
the human visual system,” Science Advances, vol. 5, no. 7, p. eaaw4358, 2019.
[40] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal, G. Sastry, A. Askell,
P. Mishkin, J. Clark, G. Krueger, and I. Sutskever, “Learning transferable visual models from
natural language supervision,” 2021.
[41] T. Darcet, M. Oquab, J. Mairal, and P. Bojanowski, “Vision transformers need registers,” 2023.
[42] J. Redmon and A. Farhadi, “Yolov3: An incremental improvement,” ArXiv, vol. abs/1804.02767,
2018.
[43] T. Ophoff, “Lightnet: Building blocks to recreate darknet networks in pytorch,” https://gitlab.
com/EAVISE/lightnet, 2018.
11

A
Appendix
A.1
Dataset Logo
The logo of the dataset is depicted in Figure 7.
Figure 7: Logo for the FindingEmo dataset.
A.2
Legal Compliance
Concerning the legal status of the dataset, two question arise: 1) are we allowed to share URLs to
(potentially) copyrighted content, and 2) are we allowed to use (potentially) copyrighted material to
train our models?
With regard to 1, we verified this with copyright experts at our institute who assured us that this is
legal. With regard to 2, we point to Title II, Article 3, “Text and data mining for the purposes of
scientific research”, of the so-called InfoSoc Directive 12, which provides an exception to copyright
obligations for (members of) research organisations. As members of KU Leuven, we fall under this
law. If you are not a member of a European research or cultural heritage institution, you will need to
check with your local regulation whether or not you have the right to use this material for research
purposes.
We are the rightful owners of the annotations, so no potential copyright issues arise for this data. We
expressly distribute the dataset under a non-commercial CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license.
A.3
Additional Annotation Dimensions
These are the remaining annotation dimensions that were not mentioned in the main text for brevity.
Age group
Users had to tick one or more boxes from “Children”, “Youth”, “Young Adults”, “Adults”
and “Seniors”, indicating the age groups present in the image.
Deciding factor(s) for emotion
Users had to tick one or more boxes from “Neutral”, “Body language”, “Conflict context vs. person”, “Facial expression” and “Staging”, indicating what prompted
them to choose for a particular emotion.
Ambiguity
Lastly, users could indicate by means of an integer scale [0, 1, . . . , 6] how ambiguous
the emotional content exhibited by the entire photograph was, or alternatively, how much difficulty
they had in annotating the picture.
A.4
Details of the Dataset Creation Process
This section describes in more detail the two phases in the dataset creation process introduced in §2.2.
12https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32019L0790
12

A.4.1
Phase 1: Gathering Images
Phase 1 consisted in building a customized, Python-based DuckDuckGo13 image scraper, programmed
to generate random image search queries as follows. Three sets of keywords were defined: one
containing a diverse set of emotions; one containing social settings and environments (e.g., ‘birthday’,
‘workplace’, etc.); and one referring to humans (e.g., ‘people’, ‘adults’, ‘youngsters’, etc.).14 By
taking all possible combinations of the elements in these sets, the system generated a multitude
of queries, such as, e.g., “happy youngsters birthday”. The first N results were then retrieved and
filtered to exclude a number of manually blacklisted domains (e.g., stock photography providers) and
by image size. Query results that passed the filtering steps were downloaded.
We started with N = 500 and image width 800px < w < 1600px, and later extended this to
N = 1000 and 800px < w < 3200. Obviously, not all downloaded images satisfied our criterion of
depicting multiple people in a natural setting. Hence, as a further filtering step, one of the authors
annotated 3097 images as either “keep” (useful) or “reject” (no use). These images were used in a
random 80/20 split to train a CNN to perform the same task, achieving an accuracy of 77.6%. This
model was used to further filter downloaded images, in particular to identify spurious images such as,
e.g., drawings, images with lots of text, etc.: if the CNN labeled the downloaded image as “reject”,
the image was discarded. If the downloaded image was labeled as “keep”, it entered the pool of
images that could be selected for annotation.
In total 1,041,105 images were collected.
A.4.2
Phase 2: Gathering Annotations
The annotations were gathered using a custom web interface written in Python, HTML and JavaScript.
Annotators were recruited through the Prolific platform. For this, a job would be created, which
we refer to as a “run”, to which users could subscribe. After doing so, they received a URL that
allowed them to log on to our system and, after agreeing to an Informed Consent clause, perform the
annotations. First, users were presented with detailed instructions, a copy of which are provided in
§A.6, after which the data collection proper began. To be able to monitor the process closely, and to
cope with hardware limitations of our server, we opted to only perform runs with a limited number
of participants, most often 10 or 15. For each run, the Prolific user selection criteria were the same:
fluent English speaker, (self-reported) neurotypical, and a 50/50 split male/female.
In total, annotations were collected over 51 runs. Candidates were informed of an expected task
duration of 1h, including reading the instructions, and offered a £10 reward. Analysis of the durations
(see §A.7) show our time estimation to be fair. We spent a total of £10k, which includes annotators
whose contributions were filtered out, and most importantly, Prolific fees and taxes.
A screenshot of the interface is included in §A.5. The interface presents users with images on the
left side, and dimensions to annotate on the right side. At the top left, users are presented with two
buttons: one to skip an image if they so wish, and one to save the current annotation and move on to
the next image.
Upon being presented an image, the first choice users needed to make was, just like the filtering CNN,
whether to “keep” or “reject” the image, according to the provided instructions. Essentially, users
were asked to reject images that contained no people, were watermarked, were of bad quality, etc. If
users opted to “reject” an image, no further annotation was needed. This step was needed to further
filter images that passed through the CNN. If the choice was “reject”, no further action (besides
saving) was required. Optionally, users could choose to select one of several tags indicating why they
opted to reject the image from “Bad quality photo”, “Copyright”, “Watermark”, “No interaction”, “No
people”, “Text” and “Not applicable”. Each user was asked to annotate 50 “keep” images; “rejects”
did not count towards the total goal. Despite this, some users still performed full annotations on
images they rejected. If users opted to “keep” the image, they were expected to annotate all other
dimensions as well.
Although the frontend (i.e., user interface) remained essentially unchanged, the backend underwent
some changes as annotations were collected, and some lessons were learned, which we discuss here.
13https://www.duckduckgo.com
14The full list of keywords is available from our code repository.
13

Initial iteration
Initially, an image was randomly selected from the corpus, and processed by an
updated “keep/reject” CNN (see §A.4.1) with an accuracy of 83.6%. If the “keep” probability pk was
< 0.75, a new random image would be selected and tested, until one was found with pk ≥0.75. If
this image had already been annotated, the process would start over, until a valid image was found,
which would then be shown to the annotator.
Second iteration
At first, the annotating of all dimensions was not enforced; users could select
the “keep” checkbox, save the annotation without annotating anything else, and move on to the next
image. Most did their job diligently, but nevertheless we opted to update the interface to require
all dimensions be annotated in case of a “keep”, before the “Save” option became available. This
frequently prompted messages from users complaining the “Save” option was not available to them.
A further update explained this to users who prematurely clicked on the “Save” button.
Third iteration
Over the course of the first few thousand annotations, it became clear that two
emotion leaves were particularly overrepresented, namely “joy” and “anticipation”, respectively
accounting for 35.9% and 23.0% of all annotations by the time of Run 9. In an attempt to counter
this, we came up with the following system.
Besides the “keep/reject” CNN, we trained a second CNN to predict the Emo8 label. We then first
computed all “keep/reject” predictions for all images in the corpus, and followed this up by predicting
Emo8 labels for all “keep”-labeled images. Upon starting the annotation server, these predictions are
loaded into memory. When selecting an image to show to a user, first an emotion label is chosen, with
odds inversely proportional to the number of images that were tagged (by the CNN) with a certain
label. Second, out of all images tagged with this label, one that had not previously been annotated by
an annotator would be chosen. The CNN used to make the predictions was retrained at several steps
along the annotation gathering process. Using this system, we managed to decrease “joy” down to
28.4%, and up “sadness” from 6.3% to 10.5%.
A.5
Annotation Interface
A screenshot of the annotation interface is shown in Figure 8.
A.6
Copy of the Annotator Instructions
Welcome
It is recommended to set your browser to “full-screen” mode. Typically, this mode can be toggled by
using the ‘F11’ key.
This interface was designed for screen resolutions with a width of 1920 pixels. In case your screen
has a higher/lower resolution, the interface should automatically resize itself so as to fully fit on your
screen, but this might come at the price of reduced image sharpness.
Thank you for your willingness to participate in this annotation task!
In this experiment, you will be expected to annotate 50 “good” images, i.e., annotated as “Keep”,
after which you will receive a URL that will direct you to the Prolific completion page for this task.
Please take the time to read these annotation instructions before continuing.
Note that if for any reason you get logged out at some point, you should be able to log back in using
the same URL provided to you by Prolific, and pick up right where you left.
We want to build a database of photographs with an emotional content. You will be shown randomly
selected images from a large corpus, and we ask you to evaluate photographs regarding 2 consecutive
issues.
First, regardless of the emotional content, all photographs should adhere to the following criteria:
• Each photograph must display a realistic situation, e.g., no drawings, no watermark, no
fantasy content (i.e., digitally manipulated photos), no horror, etc.
• The formal quality of the photograph should be sufficient, i.e., no fuzzy/blurry photographs.
14

Figure 8: A screenshot of the annotation interface. Displayed photo by David Shankbone, source: WikiMedia.
15

• Each picture must display at least 2 people that are clearly visible. Alternatively, if only one
person is shown, but this person is clearly a part of a larger context, the image can also be
suitable.
• The main feature of the photograph must not consist of a textual element. For instance, if
a cardboard displaying ‘stop racism’ is a central feature of the picture, the picture is not
suitable.
If an image does not adhere to each of these criteria, or you are not certain, please rate it as not
suitable by choosing the “Reject” option. Else, mark it as “Keep”, in which case all other dimensions,
except for “tags”, need to be annotated before you can proceed! Even if you want to keep the default
value of a slider, you still need to click the slider first.
Images can further be described by a number of tags:
• Bad quality photo: when a picture is too blocky/blurry.
• Copyright: a copyright, contrary to a watermark, is not repeated but appears only once.
Typically, this leads to the picture being rejected, unless possibly the copyright is only small
in size and could be cropped out without losing the essence of the picture.
• Watermark: a watermark is a specific pattern, typically containing the name of the copyright
holder, that is repeated over an entire image.
• No interaction: the people in the picture don’t have a direct interaction.
• No people: the picture does not depict any people.
• Text: the image contains a lot of text, either typeset on top of it, or present on, e.g., banners
held by subjects depicted in the picture. If the text is typeset, this is disqualifying (i.e., the
picture is rejected). If the text is present in the picture itself, it is disqualifying if it is too
prominent. Use your own discretion to determine what is “too prominent” and what is not.
A good rule of thumb is: if your attention is immediately drawn to the textual elements
when viewing the picture, then it is too prominent and the picture is disqualified.
• Not Applicable: typically used for images that are actually a collage of more than one photo,
or that are rejected but don’t fit any of the other tags.
If a photograph is not rated as suitable (i.e., “Reject”), no further assessment is required; click “Save”
to proceed to the next paragraph. Else, for “Keep” or “Uncertain” photos, you are also expected to
annotate the age group of the main participants in the picture. These labels are of course not clear
cut; feel free to use your own discretion as to which label applies best.
Second, we want you to focus on the emotional labelling of the photographs. Concretely, we ask you
to annotate the image on a number of dimensions
We ask you to indicate the emotional characteristic of the ENTIRE SCENE displayed in the photograph, independent of your own political/religious/sexual orientation. So a black lives matter protest
is typically negative (= the participants are not happy) independent of whether you support BLM.
Specifically, we ask you to rate the valence (“Negative/Positive”) of the overall emotional gist of the
photograph on a 7-point Likert scale from negative (-3) over neutral (0) to positive (+3), and also the
intensity, ranging from not intense at all (0) to very intense (6) by using the appropriate sliders.
We also ask to indicate an emotional label by means of a mouse click on an emotion wheel called
“Plutchik’s Wheel of Emotions”. If you can’t find the perfect emotional label then you choose
the ‘next best thing’, i.e., the one that reflects it most. In case no particular emotion fits, i.e., the
participants all display a neutral expression, you can opt to select no emotion, although such cases are
expected to be rare. For a more detailed description of each emotion depicted in this wheel, see, e.g.,
https://www.6seconds.org/2020/08/11/plutchik-wheel-emotions/. Additional info for
each emotion will be displayed when hovering over its corresponding cell.
Please also rate how straightforward the emotional content that is exhibited by the entire photograph
is using the scale indicated with “Ambiguity”. For instance, if there are approximately as much
emotionally positive as emotionally negative cues in the photograph, the emotional content would not
be clear (6), while only positive cues or only negative cues would result in a very high clarity (0).
Finally, the options under the “Deciding factor(s) for emotion” header ask which aspects of the photo
influenced you most when assessing the emotion, i.e., facial expressions, bodily expressions, the type
16

of interaction (‘Staging’) among the persons (e.g., fighting, dancing, talking), type of context (e.g.,
wedding, funeral, protest, etc.), objects in the photograph (e.g., gun, chocolate) or a possible conflict
between context and person(s) (i.e., somebody exuberantly laughing at a funeral). If none of these
apply, and/or the emotion is rather neutral, the “Neutral” tag can be used, although just as for the
emotion case, we expect these occasions to be rare.
If for some reason you would rather not annotate the current image being served to you, you can
press the “Skip” button to be served a new picture and have the annotation interface be reset, without
your current settings being saved.
If on the other hand you are happy with your current annotation, press “Save” to let it be saved
and move on to the next image. If this button is greyed out, this means you have not yet annotated
all necessary dimensions. Once you have reached the required number of annotations, you will
automatically get to see the URL that will direct you to the Prolific completion page for this task.
At the top of this screen, you can see your annotation statistics: “Rejected/Accepted” = how many
images you marked “Reject” and “Keep” respectively, and “Left” = number of “Keep” images left to
annotate.
You can always check these instructions again whilst annotating by clicking the -icon next to each
criterium. (Click once more to close the infobox again.)
A.7
Task Duration Analysis
A histogram of time taken per annotator to complete the task is shown in Figure 9. These are the
durations as reported by Prolific. An important remark to make is that for Prolific users, the clock
starts ticking once they subscribe to a job. By default, per the Prolific rules, for a job expected to
take 1h users are allowed a maximum of 140 minutes to complete the job. It appears that many
users subscribe to a job, and then leave their browser tab open for a while before starting the job
proper. (Some never start, leading to a time-out.) Taking this into account, the shown distribution is a
“pessimistic” picture, including many idled minutes. The average time taken per user, including users
that were ultimately filtered out of the dataset, was 64 ± 27 minutes. With all of the above in mind,
we conclude our alloted time was fair.
Figure 9: Distribution of minutes taken to complete the task. The plot does not include 7 outliers.
A small negative correlation manifests between the task completion time and the annotator score
(SpearmanR= −0.122, p = 0.002 for s, SpearmanR= −0.086, p = 0.029 for salt).
A.8
Annotator Statistics
Annotations were collected from 655 annotators. Prolific provided us with anonymized personal data,
except for 1 user. Not all datapoints are available for all users.
17

Of the annotators, 337 are male, 317 are female, and 1 unknown. 651 annotators were spread over
49 countries, with country for the remaining 4 unknown. Most popular were South Africa (176
annotators), Poland (127 annotators) and Portugal (104 annotators). From there, numbers drop rapidly,
with follow-up Greece accounting for only 32 annotators. The full distribution of annotators per
country is shown in Figure 10. The age distribution of the 653 users who shared that info is shown in
Figure 11, indicating a large bias towards the early 20’s.
Figure 10: Distribution of country of origin of 651 annotators.
Figure 11: Distribution of age of 653 annotators.
A.9
Inter-annotator Agreement
Recall from §2 that we hold a private set of 1,525 images that have each been annotated by multiple
users15, amounting to a combined 6115 annotations. Table 3 shows how many images have been
annotated by N different annotators. Of these, 1294 images have a majority of “Keep” annotations,
137 are mainly “Reject” and 94 are undecided.
We do not report the often used Cohen’s Kappa and/or Krippendorf’s Alpha scores, as these metrics
are only meaningful when most pairs of annotators have both annotated a substantial set of shared
images. In our case, however, by design, the number of images that have been annotated by any
15This set does not include the fixed overlap images.
18

two annotators is low (1 or 2 at most, and very often zero). As such, we feel these metrics are not
applicable. We explicitly opted to have a large number of annotators annotate a small number of
images each, in order to have the annotations better be a reflection of “the population at large”, rather
than of a few annotators.
Table 3: Number of images (“# imgs.”) that have been annotated by N different annotators (“# ants.”).
# ants.
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
# imgs.
245
328
283
524
127
17
1
Focusing on the 1294 “Keep” images, Figure 12 shows how many images have been annotated with
N different emotion labels, both for Emo8 and Emo24 labels. For 26.2% of images, all annotators
chose the same emotion leaf, and 46.6% were annotated with 2 different Emo8 labels. For the
finegrained Emo24 labels, 80.1% of images have been annotated with a maximum of 3 different
labels.
Figure 12: Number of images with N different Emo8 and Emo24 labels. The y-axis is shared between
both plots.
Figure 13: Number of images with a maximum distance D between their Emo8 and Emo24 labels,
for images annotated with more than one label. The y-axis is shared between both plots.
Turning to the question of how different the separate emotion labels for a same image are, Figure 13
shows the distribution of maximum distance between labels, for images annotated with more than one
label. The distances for 24 emotions are computed by also giving an ordinal to each emotion within a
19

leaf, as shown in Figure 14. No less than 42.8% of the times an image has been annotated with more
than one Emo8 label, those labels represent adjacent emotion leaves, while in 15.5% of the cases they
represented opposite leaves, most often the paris (“anger”, “fear”) and (“anticipation”, “surprise”).
Figure 14: Plutchik’s Wheel of Emotions: ordinals of emotions. The outer numbers represent the
ordinal of the leaf, the numbers within the upper central leaf the ordinals of the emotions within a
leaf. E.g., “joy” = 0.66 and “boredom” = 5.33. The distance between them then becomes 3.33, being
the sum of the distance between the leaves (3) and the “intra-leaf” distance (0.33).
To get a better idea of what Emo8 labels often appear together, we focused on images with 2
Emo8 labels, and plotted how often each emotion pair occurs. The result is shown in Figure 15,
demonstrating the pairs (“Joy”, “Anticipation”), (“Joy”, “Trust) and (“Aniticipation”, “Trust”) make
up the bulk of the pairs. As for opposite emotions, the pairs (“Anticipation”, “Surprise”) and (“Anger”,
“Fear”) appear markedly more ofthen than (“Joy”, “Sadness”) and (“Disgust”, “Trust”).
Figure 15: Prevalence of Emo8 label pairs for images annotated with 2 labels. The bigger the disc,
the more often the pair appears in the dataset.
To analyze the Arousal and Valence values, we compute the maximum distance between annotated
values for both dimensions over all “keep” images. For Arousal, the average maximum distance is 2.7
± 1.4, while for Valence this is 1.8 ± 1.2. This suggests that people agree much more on the Valence
20

dimension, than they do on the Arousal dimension. This is confirmed when we compute the average
maximum distance values as a function of the number of annotations for a given image, the result of
which is shown in Figure 16. For Arousal, a clear increasing maximum distance trend is visible with
a stable standard deviation, going from ±1.75 to more than 4. For Valence annotations on the other
hand, the maximum distance appears to plateau at close to 2.
Figure 16: Distribution of maximum distance between Arousal and Valence annotations as a function
of the number of annotations per image. The y-axis is shared between both plots.
A.10
Extra Dataset Analysis
Histograms showing the distribution of Arousal, Valence and Ambiguity annotation values for the
public dataset are depicted in Figure 17. Annotation statistics per Emo24 emotion are collected
in Table 4. The table is made up of three rows, each row corresponding to a ring in Plutchik’s
Wheel of Emotions, from the top row corresponding to the outer (least intense) ring, to the bottom
row corresponding to the inner (most intense) ring. The annotations follow this ordering, with
average Arousal annotations consistently increasing from least to most intense emotion ring. Valence
annotations follow suit, either increasing for positive emotions, or decreasing for negative emotions.
The sole exception to this rule is center ring “Disgust” having a slightly lower average Valence rating
(-1.62) than the inner ring “Loathing” (-1.57).
Figure 17: Distribution of Arousal, Valence and Ambiguity annotations. The y-axis is shared between
all plots.
21

Table 4: Average Arousal, Valence and Ambiguity annotation values for the public set, per emotion. Emotions are grouped per “ring” in Plutchik’s Wheel of
Emotions: from outer, least intense ring (top row) to inner, most intense ring (bottom row). The percentage of total annotations per emotion is shown in square
brackets. Format: x.xxy.yy should be read as average = x.xx, standard deviation = y.yy.
Serenity
Acceptance
Apprehension
Distraction
Pensiveness
Boredom
Annoyance
Interest
Nb.
1972 [7.6%]
1388 [5.4%]
1400 [5.4%]
356 [1.4%]
706 [2.7%]
587 [2.3%]
1008 [3.9%]
2688 [10.4%]
Arousal
2.241.00
2.211.05
2.731.12
2.041.11
2.531.17
1.650.94
2.781.02
2.030.99
Valence
1.461.00
1.141.05
−0.961.12
−0.061.11
−0.901.17
−0.360.94
−1.201.02
0.790.99
Ambiguity
1.831.65
2.001.65
2.261.61
2.711.65
2.331.63
2.301.63
2.211.55
2.161.62
Joy
Trust
Fear
Surprise
Sadness
Disgust
Anger
Anticipation
Nb.
3971 [15.4%]
1145 [4.4%]
679 [2.6%]
311 [1.2%]
1092 [4.2%]
248 [1.0%]
985 [3.8%]
1780 [6.9%]
Arousal
3.040.86
2.571.05
3.761.13
2.761.41
3.441.18
3.311.08
3.991.11
2.581.26
Valence
2.020.86
1.491.05
−1.791.13
0.351.41
−1.651.18
−1.621.08
−1.801.11
0.491.26
Ambiguity
1.471.60
1.751.59
1.921.53
2.211.70
1.821.61
2.121.59
1.861.63
2.241.55
Ecstasy
Admiration
Terror
Amazement
Grief
Loathing
Rage
Vigilance
Nb.
1083 [4.2%]
1016 [3.9%]
322 [1.2%]
221 [0.9%]
867 [3.4%]
165 [0.6%]
446 [1.7%]
1433 [5.5%]
Arousal
3.970.93
3.061.09
4.341.37
3.141.31
4.121.29
3.931.41
4.541.38
3.131.41
Valence
2.270.93
1.701.09
−2.031.37
1.511.31
−2.011.29
−1.571.41
−1.921.38
0.221.41
Ambiguity
1.521.83
1.841.66
1.691.65
2.131.61
1.461.64
2.071.79
1.801.72
2.021.66
22

A.11
UnbalancedCrossEntropyLoss and WeightedMSELoss
Table 5 compares baseline results obtained using CrossEntropyLoss vs. UnbalancedCrossEntropyLoss
for Emo8 classification, and MSELoss vs. WeightedMSELoss for Arousal/Valence regression. In
what follows, we detail the workings of UnbalancedCrossEntropyLoss and WeightedMSELoss. We
observe that UnbalancedCrossEntropyLoss presents a clear benefit over CrossEntropyLoss for the
classification problem under consideration, while WeightedMSELoss typically does not manage to
positively influence model performance for regression problems.
A.11.1
UnbalancedCrossEntropyLoss
As stated in the main text, UnbalancedCrossEntropyLoss (LUCE) allows to give different weights
to different misclassifications. E.g., it allows to penalize classifying a “joy” as a “sadness” image
heavier than classifying it as “anticipation”. It is defined as
LUCE =
wt log pt
t = h
wt log pt + wt,h log 1 −ph
t ̸= h
(1)
with t the target class with predicted probability pt, h the class with the highest predicted probability
ph, wt the weight of the target class, and wt,h the weight for misclassifying a sample of class t as
class h. In case t = h, this reverts to regular CrossEntropyLoss.
To be able to use UnbalancedCrossEntropy loss, a distance needs to be defined between each pair of
output classes. For the Emo8 task, we use the shortest number of leaves between two emotions. E.g.,
the distance between “joy” and “surprise” is 3, and the distance between “joy” and “anger” is 2.
The class weight wi for class i was computed according to
wi =
N
Nc · Ni
,
(2)
with N the total number of samples, Nc the number of classes and Ni the number of samples of class
i.
Finally, the weight wi,j for misclassifying a sample from class i as class j was computed as
wi,j =
di,j
1 + wj
· wi,
(3)
with wi the weight for class i, wj the weight for class j and di,j the distance between classes i and j.
A.11.2
WeightedMSELoss
WeightedMSELoss (LWMSE) is a natural extension of the standard MSELoss to include class weights.
Its mathematical formulation reads
LWMSE = 1
N
N
X
i=1

wi · (oi −ti)2
,
(4)
with N the number of samples, wi the class weights as defined in Eq.2 and oi and ti the network
output and target value for sample i respectively.
A.12
Additional Baseline Results
Baseline results for train data are depicted in Figure 18. Numerical baseline results on the train and
test sets have been grouped in Tables 6 and 7 respectively. A breakdown per Emo8 for train and test
sets is shown in Tables 8 and 9 respectively. For per class results, no Average Precision scores are
reported, as we did not collect these.
A.13
Additional Beyond Baseline Results
The beyond baseline Emo8 classification results on train data are shown in Figure 19. Barcharts
depicting the beyond baseline results for the Arousal and Valence regression tasks are grouped in
Figures 20 and 21 respectively.
23

Figure 18:
Train data baseline classification performance on the Emo8 classification and
Arousal/Valence regression tasks. Metrics are: Weighted F1 (W.F1) and Average Precision (AP) for
classification, and Mean Average Error (MAE) and Spearman R (S.R) for regression. The starting
learning rate and loss corresponding to each model are displayed above the training bars. (U)CE
= (Unbalanced)CrossEntropyLoss, (W)MSE = (Weighted)MeanSquaredErrorLoss, p365 = original
model trained on Places365 dataset.
24

Table 5: Loss comparison for Emo8 classification and Arousal/Valence regression tasks, comparing test results for baseline models. Performance metrics format:
.xxxyy should be read as average = 0.xxx (or z.xxx if z is specified), standard deviation = .0yy, taken over 10 runs. Best results in bold
emonet
alexnet
alexnet p365
vgg16
resnet18
resnet18 p365
resnet50
resnet50 p365
resnet101
densenet161
densenet161 p365
CLIP
Emo8
CE
Start LR
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.001
0.0001
0.0001
0.001
0.0001
0.001
0.0001
0.001
0.001
Weighted F1
.17816
.27318
.23716
.31108
.29304
.28107
.32813
.28909
.33909
.31608
.29812
.44007
Avg.Prec.
.14802
.19606
.16206
.23205
.22303
.21506
.24905
.22806
.25003
.24705
.23102
.34605
UCE
Start LR
0.001
0.0001
0.0001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.0001
0.001
Weighted F1
.19618
.27618
.25814
.31007
.29822
.28412
.33507
.29613
.33509
.32704
.30109
.43108
Avg.Prec.
.14602
.18310
.15007
.23003
.22304
.21003
.25104
.22703
.24703
.24403
.22806
.34003
Arousal
MSE
Start LR
0.001
1e −05
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.001
0.0001
0.001
0.001
0.0001
0.001
MAE
1.35401
1.33303
1.34403
1.32006
1.33403
1.33303
1.31106
1.32703
1.31404
1.32003
1.32604
1.26006
Spearman R
.09412
.20310
.17313
.23814
.21412
.21207
.26410
.22605
.25412
.25110
.23113
.34410
WMSE
Start LR
1e −05
0.0001
0.0001
1e −05
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
1e −05
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
1e −05
MAE
1.35302
1.35007
1.36106
1.32406
1.33804
1.33505
1.31805
1.33204
1.31706
1.31905
1.33004
1.26507
Spearman R
.07218
.19310
.17111
.23813
.20811
.21311
.25009
.21910
.25411
.24913
.22710
.34009
Valence
MSE
Start LR
0.001
1e −05
0.0001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.0001
MAE
1.51603
1.36308
1.39809
1.31208
1.38505
1.38207
1.29007
1.34406
1.27606
1.33611
1.35506
1.01507
Spearman R
.11712
.38310
.34210
.43409
.39413
.37811
.47707
.41409
.48708
.44014
.40810
.68505
WMSE
Start LR
0.001
1e −05
0.0001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.0001
0.001
MAE
1.56402
1.39309
1.42410
1.34111
1.41209
1.40910
1.31012
1.37009
1.29508
1.35307
1.37808
1.03309
Spearman R
.11812
.38612
.34713
.43209
.39509
.37409
.47114
.41311
.48309
.43907
.41010
.67606
25

Table 6: Training results: Emo8 classification and Arousal/Valence regression performance for baseline models. Performance metrics format: .xxxyy should be read
as average = 0.xxx (or z.xxx if z is specified), standard deviation = .0yy, taken over 10 runs.
emonet
alexnet
alexnet p365
vgg16
resnet18
resnet18 p365
resnet50
resnet50 p365
resnet101
densenet161
densenet161 p365
DINOv2
CLIP
Emo8
Loss
UCE
UCE
UCE
CE
UCE
UCE
UCE
UCE
CE
UCE
UCE
CE
CE
Start LR
0.001
0.0001
0.0001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.0001
0.0001
0.001
Accuracy
.16322
.23110
.19115
.34024
.24805
.24705
.33911
.26812
.35505
.28705
.28104
.47804
.44504
F1
.14417
.21109
.17514
.31526
.22205
.22304
.30813
.24412
.32105
.25805
.24904
.34505
.39206
Weighted F1
.17224
.24510
.20615
.35023
.26106
.26304
.35112
.28412
.36605
.30105
.29304
.44905
.45905
Avg.Prec.
.14205
.17607
.14504
.28721
.20805
.20603
.27710
.23010
.28203
.24005
.22804
.34407
.37005
Arousal
Loss
WMSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
WMSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
Start LR
1e −05
1e −05
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.001
0.0001
0.001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.001
MAE
1.35200
1.39342
1.38722
1.29903
1.34101
1.33502
1.31002
1.32602
1.30903
1.33102
1.32802
1.25703
1.25105
Spearman R
0.07105
0.13026
0.11511
0.28807
0.17706
0.19605
0.25906
0.22405
0.26005
0.22503
0.21605
0.35406
0.36108
Valence
Loss
MSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
Start LR
0.001
1e −05
0.0001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.0001
MAE
1.51502
1.43551
1.44015
1.31514
1.41203
1.40403
1.29805
1.36805
1.28704
1.36807
1.38104
1.09814
1.01002
Spearman R
0.12103
0.31330
0.28412
0.43118
0.31306
0.32605
0.45505
0.36907
0.46505
0.37111
0.35505
0.62712
0.68902
26

Table 7: Test results: Emo8 classification and Arousal/Valence regression performance for baseline models. Performance metrics format: .xxxyy should be read as
average = 0.xxx (or z.xxx if z is specified), standard deviation = .0yy, taken over 10 runs.
emonet
alexnet
alexnet p365
vgg16
resnet18
resnet18 p365
resnet50
resnet50 p365
resnet101
densenet161
densenet161 p365
DINOv2
CLIP
Emo8
Loss
UCE
UCE
UCE
CE
UCE
UCE
UCE
UCE
CE
UCE
UCE
CE
CE
Start LR
0.001
0.0001
0.0001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.0001
0.0001
0.001
Accuracy
.19222
.28021
.25922
.30310
.30119
.28616
.32707
.29613
.32911
.33013
.29410
.45007
.42707
F1
.15210
.21909
.20109
.25107
.24014
.22607
.27505
.23511
.27706
.26005
.24508
.32008
.36507
Weighted F1
.19618
.27618
.25814
.31108
.29822
.28412
.33507
.29613
.33909
.32704
.30109
.42407
.44007
Avg.Prec.
.14602
.18310
.15007
.23205
.22304
.21003
.25104
.22703
.25003
.24403
.22806
.31005
.34605
Arousal
Loss
WMSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
WMSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
Start LR
1e −05
1e −05
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.001
0.0001
0.001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.001
MAE
1.35302
1.33303
1.34403
1.32006
1.33403
1.33303
1.31106
1.32703
1.31404
1.31905
1.32604
1.27607
1.26006
Spearman R
0.07218
0.20310
0.17313
0.23814
0.21412
0.21207
0.26410
0.22605
0.25412
0.24913
0.23113
0.32212
0.34410
Valence
Loss
MSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
MSE
Start LR
0.001
1e −05
0.0001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.0001
MAE
1.51603
1.36308
1.39809
1.31208
1.38505
1.38207
1.29007
1.34406
1.27606
1.33611
1.35506
1.10712
1.01507
Spearman R
0.11712
0.38310
0.34210
0.43409
0.39413
0.37811
0.47707
0.41409
0.48708
0.44014
0.40810
0.61809
0.68505
27

Table 8: Training results: Emo8 Recall, Precision and F1 metrics per emotion leaf for baseline models.
Format: 0.xx.yy with 0.xx = average, 0.yy = standard deviation over 10 runs.
Joy
Trust
Fear
Surprise
Sadness
Disgust
Anger
Anticipation
alexnet
Recall
0.25.01
0.20.01
0.25.01
0.19.02
0.30.02
0.20.01
0.32.02
0.16.01
Precision
0.46.02
0.21.01
0.20.01
0.05.01
0.23.01
0.07.01
0.23.01
0.33.02
F1
0.33.02
0.20.01
0.22.01
0.08.01
0.26.02
0.10.01
0.27.01
0.21.01
alexnet p365
Recall
0.21.02
0.17.01
0.21.02
0.18.02
0.23.03
0.19.03
0.23.03
0.15.00
Precision
0.41.03
0.18.01
0.16.01
0.05.01
0.19.02
0.06.01
0.18.02
0.30.03
F1
0.27.02
0.18.01
0.18.02
0.08.01
0.21.03
0.09.01
0.20.02
0.20.01
vgg16
Recall
0.36.02
0.28.03
0.36.02
0.36.07
0.45.03
0.35.06
0.47.02
0.23.02
Precision
0.56.02
0.30.02
0.29.02
0.12.02
0.34.02
0.14.03
0.33.02
0.47.03
F1
0.44.02
0.29.03
0.32.02
0.18.04
0.39.03
0.20.04
0.39.02
0.31.02
resnet18
Recall
0.29.00
0.20.01
0.27.01
0.16.02
0.32.01
0.21.02
0.36.01
0.15.01
Precision
0.48.01
0.22.01
0.22.01
0.05.00
0.24.01
0.07.01
0.24.01
0.36.01
F1
0.36.01
0.21.01
0.24.01
0.08.01
0.27.01
0.11.01
0.29.01
0.22.01
resnet18 p365
Recall
0.29.01
0.19.01
0.25.01
0.18.01
0.31.01
0.24.02
0.35.01
0.17.01
Precision
0.47.01
0.22.01
0.21.01
0.06.00
0.24.01
0.08.00
0.24.01
0.37.01
F1
0.36.01
0.21.01
0.23.01
0.09.01
0.27.01
0.12.01
0.29.01
0.23.01
resnet50
Recall
0.38.01
0.28.02
0.34.01
0.29.04
0.46.01
0.30.03
0.46.02
0.23.01
Precision
0.57.01
0.29.01
0.30.01
0.11.01
0.34.02
0.12.01
0.33.01
0.46.01
F1
0.46.01
0.28.01
0.32.01
0.16.02
0.39.01
0.17.02
0.38.01
0.31.01
resnet50 p365
Recall
0.30.01
0.20.01
0.27.02
0.22.03
0.34.02
0.26.03
0.38.01
0.19.01
Precision
0.50.01
0.23.01
0.23.01
0.07.01
0.27.01
0.09.01
0.27.01
0.39.02
F1
0.38.01
0.22.01
0.25.01
0.10.02
0.30.01
0.13.02
0.32.01
0.25.02
resnet101
Recall
0.40.00
0.28.01
0.37.01
0.28.02
0.49.01
0.31.02
0.47.01
0.25.01
Precision
0.58.01
0.30.01
0.31.01
0.11.01
0.35.01
0.13.01
0.33.01
0.47.01
F1
0.47.01
0.29.01
0.33.01
0.16.01
0.41.01
0.19.01
0.39.01
0.33.01
densenet161
Recall
0.34.01
0.23.01
0.30.01
0.19.03
0.39.01
0.25.02
0.40.01
0.18.01
Precision
0.52.01
0.24.01
0.25.01
0.07.01
0.29.01
0.08.01
0.29.00
0.40.01
F1
0.41.01
0.24.01
0.27.01
0.10.01
0.33.01
0.13.01
0.34.01
0.25.01
densenet161 p365
Recall
0.33.01
0.21.01
0.28.01
0.15.02
0.37.01
0.24.02
0.42.01
0.19.01
Precision
0.50.01
0.24.01
0.23.01
0.07.01
0.27.00
0.09.00
0.26.01
0.40.01
F1
0.40.01
0.22.01
0.25.01
0.09.01
0.31.01
0.13.01
0.32.01
0.26.01
DINOv2
Recall
0.71.00
0.22.01
0.27.01
0.00.00
0.51.01
0.04.01
0.43.01
0.59.01
Precision
0.56.00
0.41.01
0.37.01
0.27.12
0.53.00
0.32.04
0.47.01
0.42.00
F1
0.62.00
0.28.01
0.31.01
0.01.00
0.52.01
0.07.01
0.45.01
0.49.00
CLIP
Recall
0.57.01
0.37.01
0.35.01
0.25.03
0.56.01
0.34.02
0.56.01
0.33.01
Precision
0.69.01
0.35.01
0.33.01
0.11.01
0.53.01
0.15.01
0.45.00
0.52.01
F1
0.62.00
0.36.01
0.34.01
0.15.01
0.55.01
0.21.01
0.50.01
0.40.01
For the Arousal and Valence regression tasks, we dropped experiments with Places365 models in
favor of precomputed Emo8 predictions using the same model architecture. E.g., for the Arousal
task and AlexNet architecture, we combine the 8-feature vector obtained by applying a pretrained
AlexNet Emo8 classifier with the 1-feature vector obtained by applying a pretrained AlexNet Arousal
regressor. We also changed the merger network from simply concatenating the stream features to
first reducing the second stream features to 1D by means of a linear layer + sigmoid, and then
concatening both 1D features (from the precomputed Arousal/Valence regression + reduced second
28

Table 9: Test results: Emo8 Recall, Precision and F1 metrics per emotion leaf for baseline models.
Format: 0.xx.yy with 0.xx = average, 0.yy = standard deviation over 10 runs.
Joy
Trust
Fear
Surprise
Sadness
Disgust
Anger
Anticipation
alexnet
Recall
0.38.09
0.18.10
0.24.08
0.05.05
0.36.09
0.08.05
0.38.08
0.23.08
Precision
0.46.04
0.22.02
0.20.02
0.04.01
0.25.04
0.07.01
0.25.03
0.35.02
F1
0.40.06
0.18.05
0.21.03
0.04.02
0.29.01
0.07.02
0.29.02
0.27.05
alexnet p365
Recall
0.40.09
0.17.08
0.24.09
0.10.09
0.28.08
0.08.06
0.24.08
0.20.09
Precision
0.42.02
0.22.02
0.19.02
0.05.01
0.24.04
0.05.02
0.23.03
0.33.03
F1
0.40.04
0.18.05
0.20.03
0.06.02
0.25.02
0.05.03
0.22.04
0.24.06
vgg16
Recall
0.40.04
0.20.03
0.26.05
0.09.04
0.38.04
0.14.05
0.40.08
0.25.07
Precision
0.50.01
0.24.02
0.23.02
0.05.01
0.30.02
0.07.02
0.30.05
0.38.03
F1
0.44.02
0.21.02
0.24.02
0.06.02
0.33.02
0.09.02
0.34.02
0.29.04
resnet18
Recall
0.36.09
0.31.11
0.37.09
0.04.04
0.30.11
0.09.05
0.33.10
0.27.07
Precision
0.50.05
0.22.02
0.23.02
0.04.03
0.31.07
0.10.02
0.30.03
0.36.04
F1
0.40.08
0.24.04
0.28.02
0.03.03
0.28.06
0.09.02
0.31.04
0.30.04
resnet18 p365
Recall
0.36.08
0.19.07
0.30.09
0.04.02
0.30.10
0.12.06
0.35.08
0.28.10
Precision
0.47.03
0.24.02
0.19.02
0.06.03
0.27.04
0.08.02
0.25.03
0.35.03
F1
0.40.04
0.20.04
0.23.03
0.04.02
0.27.03
0.08.02
0.28.03
0.30.07
resnet50
Recall
0.39.05
0.25.04
0.32.06
0.07.02
0.44.06
0.13.02
0.44.04
0.28.03
Precision
0.54.02
0.24.02
0.27.03
0.06.02
0.33.03
0.08.01
0.31.02
0.40.02
F1
0.45.03
0.24.02
0.29.02
0.06.01
0.37.02
0.10.01
0.36.01
0.33.02
resnet50 p365
Recall
0.38.08
0.19.11
0.31.10
0.06.06
0.30.07
0.10.05
0.33.09
0.30.11
Precision
0.49.05
0.24.02
0.21.02
0.04.02
0.31.05
0.07.01
0.30.05
0.35.03
F1
0.42.04
0.19.06
0.24.03
0.04.03
0.30.02
0.08.02
0.30.03
0.31.05
resnet101
Recall
0.42.03
0.23.04
0.34.05
0.08.03
0.45.04
0.15.05
0.42.03
0.25.04
Precision
0.54.01
0.25.01
0.26.02
0.05.01
0.33.02
0.08.01
0.31.01
0.43.03
F1
0.47.02
0.24.02
0.29.02
0.06.01
0.38.01
0.10.02
0.36.01
0.31.03
densenet161
Recall
0.48.07
0.17.06
0.26.07
0.06.05
0.39.09
0.13.09
0.43.05
0.27.05
Precision
0.49.03
0.28.02
0.25.02
0.04.02
0.31.04
0.08.02
0.31.02
0.38.01
F1
0.48.02
0.20.04
0.25.04
0.04.03
0.34.02
0.09.02
0.36.01
0.31.04
densenet161 p365
Recall
0.38.03
0.20.03
0.27.04
0.05.03
0.38.02
0.15.02
0.43.03
0.22.03
Precision
0.49.02
0.23.01
0.23.01
0.04.01
0.28.01
0.08.01
0.25.02
0.38.01
F1
0.43.02
0.21.02
0.25.02
0.04.02
0.32.02
0.10.01
0.32.01
0.28.03
DINOv2
Recall
0.67.05
0.23.05
0.25.07
0.00.00
0.47.02
0.02.02
0.42.05
0.55.04
Precision
0.56.03
0.36.03
0.32.01
0.00.00
0.49.04
0.17.08
0.42.03
0.40.01
F1
0.61.01
0.27.04
0.28.04
0.00.00
0.48.02
0.04.03
0.42.02
0.46.01
CLIP
Recall
0.57.03
0.33.03
0.35.05
0.17.02
0.54.02
0.21.03
0.52.03
0.34.04
Precision
0.67.01
0.33.01
0.32.02
0.08.01
0.52.03
0.11.01
0.43.02
0.48.01
F1
0.61.02
0.33.02
0.33.03
0.11.01
0.53.02
0.14.01
0.47.01
0.40.02
29

stream) and send these through a final linear layer + sigmoid. Finally, we only consider MSELoss,
and lr0 ∈[10−3, 10−4, 10−5].
A numerical comparison of the baseline to the (overall best performing) “Baseline+OIToFER”
model for all three tasks is included in Table 10. From this, it is apparent that obtainable gains are
architecture-dependent, with the VGG16 and ResNet50 architectures obtaining most gains and the
DenseNet161, CLIP and DINOv2 architectures barely improving, regardless of task. Obtained gains
are highest for the Emo8 task (absolute 13.7% AP gain, or relative 59%, for VGG16). Gains for the
Arousal and Valence tasks are somewhat less straightforward to compare, as changes in MAE and
Spearman R do not always agree. Compare, e.g., for ResNet50, for the Valence task an absolute
0.121 MAE and 0.120 Spearman R improvement, or relative 9.0% and 22.5% respectively, to an
absolute 0.039 MAE and 0.087 Spearman R improvement, or relative 2.9% and 38% respectively for
the Arousal task.
Figure 19: Training data results for extensions beyond the ImageNet baseline by applying late
fusion with EmoNet predictions (EmoNet), Facial Emotion Recognition predictions (OIToFER) and
Places365 (P365) predictions or features. For all models, predictions on the dataset are concatenated
and sent through a linear layer, except when ‘(f)’ is shown, indicating model features are concatenated.
The starting learning rate corresponding to each model is displayed above the training bars.
A.14
A Note on the Fuzziness of Emotion Recognition
As shown in §A.9, if there is disagreement between annotators concerning the emotion depicted in
an image, then it is typically among similar emotions. So, although annotators often disagree, the
different labels provided for a same image are far from random, instead showing clear tendencies
toward a specific region of the emotion spectrum.
This fuzzyiness in assigned labels is a feature of human psychology. Emotion recognition is hard,
nuanced, and multidimensional. With more raters, one would obtain a distribution of responses, but
still no perfect agreement. To compound this issue, the estimate of the distribution per image would
be poor unless one has many raters per image (tens of raters for tens of thousands of images!). This
is, for many reasons not least of which financially, highly impractical.
Having one rater per image gives uncertainty if one is interested in a single image, but the average
performance across many images is still meaningful. To demonstrate this, we perform the following
experiment: for several architectures, we train an Emo8 prediction model on our dataset, and once
trained, we let the model make predictions for each image in the training set. We train 5 models per
lr0 ∈[10−1, 10−2, 10−3, 10−4] using CrossEntropyLoss, and keep the one with the highest Weighted
F1 score as the winner. For these models, we list in Table 11 how often the annotated emotion was
ranked N (out of 8), and in Table 12 we show the distance between the top predicted and annotated
emotions. Except for AlexNet, all other models show a nice downward sloping behavior as either
the rank (Table 11) or distance (Table 12) increases. In other words, the “mistakes” made by these
models are clearly not random, but show behavior that is similar to those observed in the human
30

Figure 20: Arousal regression results for extensions beyond the baseline by applying late fusion
with precomputed Emo8 predictions of the same architecture (Emo8), Facial Emotion Recognition
predictions (OIToFER) and EmoNet predictions (EmoNet). For all models, precomputed predictions
on the dataset (Aro1) are concatenated and sent through a linear layer. Metrics are: Mean Average
Error (MAE) and Spearman R (S.R). The starting learning rate corresponding to each model is
displayed above the training bars.
annotators. This confirms that even with a single annotation per image, already valuable results and
insights can be obtained.
A.15
Author Responsibility Statement
We, the authors, confirm that we bear all responsibility in case of any violation of rights during the
collection of the data or other work, and that we will take appropriate action if and when needed,
e.g., to remove data with such issues. We also confirm the licenses provided with the data and code
associated with this work: an MIT license for all code; a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license for the dataset
(concretely, the list of URLs and the annotations).
In particular, and as clearly and explicitly stated on our repository (under “Legal Compliance and
Privacy”), we invite any rightful copyright holders or persons depicted in any of the images that do
not want their work/likeness to be used within the context of this dataset to contact us, so that we can
remove that specific material from the dataset.
31

Table 10: Baseline vs. +OIToFER: A comparison of Emo8 classification and Arousal/Valence
regression performance on the test data.
alexnet
vgg16
resnet18
resnet50
resnet101
densenet161
DINOv2
CLIP
Emo8
Baseline
Start LR
0.0001
0.001
0.0001
0.0001
0.001
0.0001
0.0001
0.001
Accuracy
.27125
.30310
.27108
.27909
.32911
.30809
.45007
.42707
F1
.22110
.25107
.23206
.24008
.27706
.26108
.32008
.36507
Weighted F1
.27318
.31108
.28107
.28909
.33909
.31608
.42407
.44007
Avg.Prec.
.19606
.23205
.21506
.22806
.25003
.24705
.31005
.34605
+OIToFER
Start LR
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.01
0.1
Accuracy
.29904
.39005
.31506
.36605
.36707
.34304
.45103
.47510
F1
.24303
.36305
.23906
.32104
.32107
.27805
.28805
.32216
Weighted F1
.29604
.39905
.29907
.37204
.37207
.33904
.39505
.43020
Avg.Prec.
.23705
.36905
.23202
.31105
.31306
.26903
.36007
.38406
Arousal
Baseline
Start LR
1e −05
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
MAE
1.33303
1.32006
1.33303
1.32703
1.31404
1.32103
1.27607
1.26007
Spearman R
.20310
.23814
.21207
.22605
.26108
.25308
.32212
.34714
+OIToFER
Start LR
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.001
0.001
MAE
1.33003
1.29005
1.32904
1.28805
1.27906
1.30804
1.25304
1.24505
Spearman R
.22011
.30512
.22610
.31309
.32611
.27209
.36909
.38007
Valence
Baseline
Start LR
0.0001
0.0001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.0001
0.0001
MAE
1.36908
1.31406
1.38207
1.34406
1.27606
1.33611
1.10709
1.01507
Spearman R
.37909
.44008
.37811
.41409
.48708
.44014
.62110
.68505
+OIToFER
Start LR
0.01
0.001
0.01
0.01
0.001
0.01
0.001
0.01
MAE
1.32406
1.23706
1.32407
1.22306
1.21507
1.27406
1.07708
1.00507
Spearman R
.43807
.52206
.44407
.53406
.54305
.48309
.64907
.69305
Table 11: Percentage of times, with respect to the full training set, the annotated emotion was ranked
N in the model predictions.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
alexnet
22.5
15.7
13.5
11.8
11.0
10.1
8.9
6.5
vgg16
41.8
20.3
13.2
9.0
6.0
4.7
3.1
2.0
resnet18
31.3
19.2
13.3
10.6
8.4
6.9
5.8
4.5
resnet50
38.1
19.4
13.5
9.5
7.0
5.5
4.0
2.9
resnet101
38.4
20.2
13.2
9.4
6.8
5.1
4.0
3.0
densenet161
33.3
18.7
13.4
10.4
8.4
6.5
5.2
4.0
Table 12: Percentage of times, with respect to the full training set, the distance between the annotated
and predicted emotions was equal to N in the model predictions.
0
1
2
3
4
alexnet
22.5
19.7
19.1
23.7
15.0
vgg16
41.8
21.4
15.2
14.0
7.7
resnet18
31.3
26.1
17.0
17.0
8.6
resnet50
38.1
21.7
16.2
15.7
8.3
resnet101
38.4
23.1
16.9
14.1
7.5
densenet161
33.3
22.8
18.4
16.8
8.7
32

Figure 21: Valence regression results for extensions beyond the baseline by applying late fusion
with precomputed Emo8 predictions of the same architecture (Emo8), Facial Emotion Recognition
predictions (OIToFER) and EmoNet predictions (EmoNet). For all models, precomputed predictions
on the dataset (Val1) are concatenated and sent through a linear layer. Metrics are: Mean Average
Error (MAE) and Spearman R (S.R). The starting learning rate corresponding to each model is
displayed above the training bars.
33
