i



Julia Ruoranen
MEMORY DISORDER DETECTION WITH
FACE EXPRESSION ANALYSIS


























Faculty of Information Technology and Communication Sciences
Bachelor’s Thesis
May 2023

ABSTRACT
Julia Ruoranen: Memory disorder detection using face expression analysis
Bachelor’s Thesis
Tampere University
Bachelor’s Programme in Computing and Electrical Engineering
May 2023


Facial expressions are people’s way of communicating and interact with each other. Without
saying a word person can message his/her emotions by them. When there happen some changes
in facial expressions it can affect person’s social interaction and relationships. Changes in facial
expressions occur with memory disorder. Of the individual symptoms, apathy in particular reduces
the intensity of the facial expressions, making the face expressionless.
The purpose of this thesis was to explore how the facial expression recognition program could
be applied when searching memory disorder. The focus is on apathy as a symptom because it
correlates clearest with changes in facial expressions. The idea was to recognize facial expressions from two video clips. The difference between the clips was that the first one had spontaneous reactions for a funny video and second one expressionless reaction to the same video. Recognized expressions were analyzed and the differences between the videos were spotted to show
how the apathic facial expressions differ from normally produced facial expressions.
The program was built by using Python facial expressions analysis toolbox (PyFeat) which
contains tools for analyzing and visualizing facial expressions. Detector for facial expression analysis was built by using PyFeat’s pretrained detectors (face, facial landmarks, pose, action units
and emotions). This detector recognized expressions from the videos and produces data of face
and facial landmark location, action units’ prediction values and emotional reactions’ prediction
values.
Biggest differences between the videos were found in action units’ and emotions’ prediction
values. Action unit values showed that movement in any action unit area were minimum since the
values stayed in 0.5 and under the whole video. While comparing the certain action units which
produces emotional reaction of happiness (the emotion which was tried to trigger with the video)
the spontaneous video’s values were high most time of the video while the apathic video showed
no movement in these action units during the video. Emotion prediction values showed as well
that the maintaining emotion in the spontaneous video was happiness but in the apathic video the
maintaining emotion was neutral. Neutral facial expression was there to describe where there is
no visible emotion in the face.
 Neutral expression is main thing to focus when trying to find out if the memory disorder exists.
Important thing to notice is that some reference data is needed when analyzing someone’s facial
expression changes since people have differences in facial expressiveness in usual. In the future
the concrete differences need to be identified if the facial expression analysis is wanted to be
used as a memory disorder detection method.


Keywords: facial expressions, memory disorders, apathy, facial expression analysis, computer
vision, neural network


The originality of this thesis has been checked using the Turnitin OriginalityCheck service.





TIIVISTELMÄ
Julia Ruoranen: Kasvonilmeiden analyysi muistisairauden etsinnässä
Kandidaatin tutkielma
Tampereen yliopisto
Tieto- ja sähkötekniikan kandidaattiohjelma
Toukokuu 2023

Kasvonilmeet ovat kommunikoinnin ja viestinnän keino ihmisten välillä. Niiden avulla ihmiset
kykenevät viestimään omista tunnetiloistaan ilman sanallista viestiä. Kun ilmeissä tapahtuu
muutoksia, voi se vaikuttaa ihmisen vuorovaikutukseen ja sosiaalisiin suhteisiin. Muistisairaudet
ovat yksi ilmeissä tapahtuvien muutosten aiheuttajista. Yksittäisistä oireista erityisesti apatia
vähentää ilmeiden voimakkuutta tehden kasvoista ilmeettömämmät.
Työn tarkoituksena oli tutkia, miten kasvonilmeitä tunnistavaa ohjelmaa voisi hyödyntää
muistisairauden etsimisessä. Keskittymiskohtana oireista toimi nimenomaan apatia, koska
aiemmissa tutkimuksissa oli löydetty selkeää korrelaatiota apatian ja kasvonilmeiden muutosten
välille. Ohjelman ideana oli tunnistaa kasvonilmeet kahdesta videoklipistä. Analysoitavat
videoklipit oli luotu siten, että ensimmäisessä videossa oli spontaani reaktio ja toisessa
ilmeettömämpi reaktio hauskaan videoon. Analyysin tuloksia tutkimalla etsittiin eroja videoiden
välillä, jotta pystytään esittämään, miten apaattiset kasvonilmeet eroavat tavallisista
kasvonilmeistä.
Ohjelma rakennettiin käyttäen Python Facial Expression Analysis Toolbox:ia (PyFeat), joka
sisältää malleja ja työkaluja kasvonilmeiden tunnistamiseen ja analysointiin. PyFeat:in avulla
luotiin ns. etsintätyökalu, joka koostui PyFeat:n omista esiharjoitetuista etsintäkomponenteista.
Etsintätyökalu tunnistaa kasvonilmeet ja tuottaa dataa kasvojen ja kasvonpiirteiden sijainnista
videolla, pään ja kasvojen asennosta sekä toimintayksiköiden (action units) ja ilmeiden
ennustearvoista.
Suurimmat erot videoiden välillä löydettiin toimintayksiköiden ja ilmeiden ennustearvoista.
Ilmeettömän videon kohdalla missään toimintayksikössä ei tapahtunut aktivoitumista eli
ennustearvo 0.5 tai alle, mikä viittaa siihen, että kasvoissa ei tapahtunut liikettä ilmeitä tuottavissa
lihaksissa. Ilon tunnetta tuottavissa toimintayksiköissä oli selkeä ero videoiden välillä:
spontaanissa videossa toimintayksiköt olivat selkeästi aktiiviset eli ennustearvo yli 0.8 koko
videon ajan, kun taas ilmeettömän videon kohdalla ennustearvot pysyivät lähellä nollaa. Ilmeiden
ennustearvoissa ilon tunne oli selkeästi läsnä koko spontaanin videon ajan, apaattisella videolla
taas koko videon tunnetila on neutraali. Neutraali tunnetila on kuvastamassa tilannetta, jossa
kasvoilla ei ole mitään näkyvää tunnereaktiota.
Neutraali tunnetila ja tunnetilojen ennustearvot muutenkin ovat tärkein keskittymiskohta, kun
yritetään etsiä muistisairauteen viittavia piirteitä. On hyvä kuitenkin muistaa, että jonkinlaista
referenssimateriaalia tarvitaan, kun analysoidaan kasvonilmeiden muutoksia, sillä kasvojen
ilmeikkyydessä on lähtökohtaisesti eroja ihmisten välillä. Tulevaisuudessa konkreettisia
muutoksia pitäisi identifioida tarkemmin, mikäli kasvonilmeiden analyysia halutaan hyödyntää
muistisairauden etsinnässä.


Avainsanat:
kasvonilmeet,
muistisairaus,
apatia,
kasvonilmeiden
analyysi,
konenäkö,
neuroverkot


Tämän julkaisun alkuperäisyys on tarkastettu Turnitin OriginalityCheck –ohjelmalla.






CONTENTS

1. INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................. 1
2. RELATED WORK ................................................................................................. 3
3. FACE DETECTION ............................................................................................... 5
3.1
Image processing ................................................................................. 6
3.2
Low-level analysis ................................................................................ 7
3.3
Neural networks ................................................................................... 9
3.4
Convolutional neural network ............................................................. 10
3.5
Multitask convolutional neural network ............................................... 12
4. FACE FEATURE DETECTION AND CLASSIFICATION ..................................... 15
4.1
Face feature detection ....................................................................... 15
4.2
Residual Masking Network for FER .................................................... 17
5. DEMO ................................................................................................................. 20
5.1
Pretrained detectors ........................................................................... 20
5.2
Implementation and results ................................................................ 22
6. CONCLUSION .................................................................................................... 27
REFERENCES....................................................................................................... 28



LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1.1 Estimated prevalence of dementia in years 2021 and 2050 [2] .................... 1
Figure 3.1 FER process ................................................................................................ 5
Figure 3.2 Image matrix ................................................................................................ 6
Figure 3.3 Edge Image ................................................................................................. 8
Figure 3.4 Node’s structure ......................................................................................... 10
Figure 3.5 NN's structure ............................................................................................ 10
Figure 3.6 CNN’s structure ......................................................................................... 11
Figure 3.7 Simple convolutional computation .............................................................. 12
Figure 3.8 P-net structure ........................................................................................... 13
Figure 3.9 R-net structure ........................................................................................... 13
Figure 3.10 O-net structure ......................................................................................... 14
Figure 4.1 PFLD network structure ............................................................................. 16
Figure 4.2 RMN's structur ........................................................................................... 18
Figure 4.3 Residual layer’s structure ........................................................................... 18
Figure 4.4 Masking block ............................................................................................ 19
Figure 5.1 Aggregated data from the spontaneous video ............................................ 22
Figure 5.2 Aggregated data from the apathy video ..................................................... 23
Figure 5.3 AU Predictions from the spontaneous video .............................................. 24
Figure 5.4 AU Predictions from the apathy video ........................................................ 24
Figure 5.5 AU06 and AU12 predictions from both videos ............................................ 25
Figure 5.6 Emotion predictions from the spontaneous video ....................................... 25
Figure 5.7 Emotion predictions from the apathy video ................................................ 25





LIST OF SYMBOLS AND ABBREVIATIONS
AD
Alzheimer’s Disease
AU
Action unit
ASM
Active shape model
CI
Cognitive Impairment
CNN
Convolutional Neural Network
DPM
Deformable Part Model
DTM
Deformable Template Matching
FACS
 Facial Action Coding System
FER
Facial Expression Recognition
IOU
Intersection Over Union
LLA
Low-level Analysis
MD
Memory Disorder
NME
Normalized Mean Error
NN
Neural networks
NMS
Non-Maximum Suppression
PFLD
Practical Facial Landmark Detector
ReLU
Rectified Linear Unit





 t
time unit


.

1

1. INTRODUCTION
Facial expressions are one way to communicate with other people. Without saying
anything people can message to each other what their feelings in certain situations are
by their face. When the recognition and production of facial expressions weakens it can
affect persons social relationships significantly.

Neuropsychiatric diseases where damage in certain part of the brain obstructs or decreases the ability to remember, store and maintain memories are called memory disorders. They also affect person’s cognitive capabilities and social behaviours.[1] Since
the memory disorders occur more in older people, in countries where the population is
aging the memory disorders come more and more common. Figure 1.1 shows some statistics from year’s 2015 World Alzheimer Report where has been predicted the prevalence of dementia in years 2021 and 2050 [2].


Figure 1.1 Estimated prevalence of dementia in years 2021 and 2050 [2]
One of the cognitive capabilities in which the memory disorder affects are production
and recognition of facial expressions. The common symptoms such as apathy impair the
facial expressiveness of neuropsychiatric disorder patients [3]. Since memory disorder
causes changes in the facial expressions, they could be one of the factors to be observed
when detecting possible memory disorder. Computer vision-based facial analysis has
been used in memory disorder research for several years. The research in these studies
has been focused on finding out the main differences in facial expressions between
memory disorder patients and healthy people. Some of the studies focus on analysing

2

certain symptoms inside the memory diseases and these symptoms effects in facial expressions and some of them handles the topic more general way.

This thesis examines how the program that analyses face expressions could be applied in the search for memory disorder. The experimental part of this thesis is demo
program which presents one proposal how the facial expression analysis could be use in
search of memory disorder. The idea of the demo program is to process facial expressions from video footage and find differences which could be caused by memory disorder. The program is build using traditional facial expression recognition program. Results
from the program are analysed and compared to find out the main points to focus on in
facial expression while searching memory disorder. It is important to notice that the
program in this thesis is simplified and need to be further refined so it can be deployed
in the detection of memory disorders.

The structure of the thesis is followed. Chapter 2 presents the earlier research where
facial expression recognition was used to find differences between healthy people and
people with memory problems and what differences were found. Chapter 3 goes
through methods and algorithms used when detecting the face from an image. The
fourth chapter presents how the facial features which are used to create facial expressions can be found from the face and the classification algorithms which could be used
to classify the facial expressions. The ways of analysing facial expression’s intensity are
also presented in chapter 4. The demo code implementation is detailed in chapter 5.
The final chapter summarizes the experimental chapter 5 and handles some problematic
parts of the topic and discusses about the future of the field.

3

2. RELATED WORK
Facial expression recognition (FER) is versatile tool that could be applied in different
fields. Since facial expressions are one way of message emotions, they could be used in
various psychological and medical research. Related to memory disorders (MD) FER has
been used to find differences between healthy people and people with MD. Most of
these studies have had promising results and the correlations between memory disorders and changes in facial expressions has been found [3-6]. The field still needs more
research before FER could be bring into use in the search of MD.

The studies where facial expressions of the MD patients were analysed were based
on tasks with some sort of emotional stimuli. The test subjects could have been asked
to tell positive and negative story [3,6] or the stimuli could have been some visual footage shown to the test subjects [5,7]. In all the studies the participants consisted of
healthy people and people with MD. In most of the studies the participant group included other cognitive impairment (CI) patients as well. The facial expressions of the test
subjects were recorded, and the results of healthy and MD/CI patients were compared.
In that way the correlations between facial expression changes and MD were discovered. Nex few of the studies and parameters to use in them are viewed more closely.

One way to find out how effective person’s facial expression production is to make
the person mimic different kinds of facial expressions. This research shows how efficient
the facial expression recognition and the reproduction of those expressions is. Facial
expression mimicry was research by using three test groups: healthy older adults, adults
with mild cognitive impairments and adults with Alzheimer’s disease. The main task for
research targets was to mimic the emotional facial expressions from 49 still pictures displayed to them. The Kinect 3D recording was used to measure the test person’s adequacy of the facial expressions in six basic emotions and was compared to person’s own
typical emotional facial expressions. There was found no significant differences with
healthy or MCI groups in frequency nor adequacy of emotional facial expressions. The
difference in patterns of emotional expression was found in the Alzheimer’s disease
group (AD group). Even though the frequency which the negative/positive emotions
were shown was the same with all groups the AD group has difficulties to flexibly adjust
in the presented stimuli (meaning the picture). In conclusion the result of the research
shows that the AD group participant only one of the emotional stimuli’s signs, either
positive or negative. [5]

One of the most common symptoms that appears in neurocognitive disorders is apathy. It is one of the symptoms which can appear in very early stage in the disease progression and in that way affects even in the very beginning of the memory disorder. [3]

4

The general definition of apathy is absence of emotion, concern, interest, and motivation which results in lack of drive and self-initiated behaviour [8]. In this thesis the absence of emotions is the most interesting part because the change in emotions affects
the emotional facial expressions. There is correlation between apathy and person’s ability to produce facial expressions [3,4]. Even though apathy moderates cognitive deficits
effect of the facial expressions the apathy itself decreases overall and specific facial expressions [4]. Apathy correlates negatively with basic facial movements which means
that when the apathy deepens, lack of facial expressions increases [3]. In addition, spontaneous emotional expressions are weakened people with apathy [4]. Since the apathy
is common symptom in memory disorders it could be used as a parameter in memory
disorder detection based on facial expression changes.


5

3. FACE DETECTION
Facial expression recognition process can be divided in few different phases. First the
face needs to be found from the image (or video). When the face is localized from the
image the face features need to be detected as well. The extracted features are used to
train the classifier which is used in the end to recognize the facial expressions from the
real-life data. Figure 3.1 presents the steps of FER.


Figure 3.1 FER process
First step to analyse facial expressions is to find the face from the image. This step is
called face detection and its main target is to first find out is there a face in the image
and if the face is founded, show its location and how many faces there are in the image
[8]. In this thesis the assumption is that the image always contains face and there is
only one face in the image.

6

There are some challenges which are good to notice when creating the face detector.
The camera ancle or person’s pose can affect in a way that some of the critical features
such as the nose or an eye might be invisible to the camera, or some objects might
cover these areas. Various shape, colour, and size from some structural components
such as glasses or beards and that they might be in the image or not may also make
the face detection harder. [8]
When detecting something from an image, image needs to be processed somehow.
The basic structure of the image processing in base in every image-related tasks. Chapter 3.1 determines image and image processing and goes through the differences between basic image processing and computer vision. In chapter 3.2 presents shortly
low-level analysis methods where the characteristics of image which use in detection
are presented. Since neural networks are mostly used in object detection these days,
they are presented more closely in chapter 3.3. Chapter 3.4 goes deeper in neural networks presenting convolutional neural network and chapter 3.5 presents the specific
network structure which the pretrained face detection model has.
3.1
Image processing
Before getting basics of image processing the concept of digital image is good to be clarify. Digital image can determined as a two-dimensional function F(x,y) where x and y
describes the coordinate values of certain point of an image and F is the intensity value
at the point (x,y) in an image [9]. Image points are called as pixels and these pixels together form the whole image. When the coordinate values x and y and F values are finite
the image can be called as digital image [9]. Pixel points together form an image matrix
where is columns and rows. Example of image matrix is presented in figure 3.2.


Figure 3.2 Image matrix
Grayscale images contains only one image matrix which describes the intensities in
every point in the image. The most used image colour format is 8-bit colour format [9]
which means that there are 256 intensity values, and all the pixel values are between 0

7

and 255. In colour images there is more than one image matrix. Most famous colour
image model is Red-green-blue (RGB) colour model where there are three image matrixes and each of them represents one colour’s information: one matrix is for red, one
for green and one for blue colour information. By combining these three matrixes the
true colour information of the image is produced.
Image processing can be described as a process where certain operations are performed
to a digital image to find some useful information or deleting some useless information
such as noise from an image. Image is usually processed with the algorithm in smaller
parts. Sometimes single intensity values of an image are processed with some algorithm.
Example for this is grayscaling where the RGB images colour 3D information is transformed in 2D grayscale information. Image can be processed also in bigger windows,
such as 2x2 or 3x3 pixels. Every value of the area is used with the algorithm to calculate
one output value for an output matrix. In this thesis the image is processed is processed
mostly in 2x2 or 3x3 patches.
The field where image processing is categorised, differs depending on the form of input
and output data of the process. When output and input data are both in image form,
the field is called digital image processing. When input data is in image form and output
data is some description, the field is computer vision. [9] In this thesis both the model
training and real data analysis are determined in computer vision. In training the image
data is used to teach the algorithm how the model should classify certain images. After
training real image data is feed for the model and the model gives a class label and other
descriptive information.
The difference between image processing and computer vision is that image processing
is more focused on processing the whole image and preparing the data for other tasks
and computer vision focuses more to find information inside the image, like human
brain analyses the visual information [10]. Basic structure of image processing is same
as in computer vision, only the goal is different. Image processing is often used as a sub
method in computer vision-based tasks to make the separation of information easier.
3.2
Low-level analysis
Low-level analysis (LLA) focuses more on pixel information, and it concerns more certain
components of the face. Different methods in low-level analysis are based on severe
descriptors in the image such as edges, information about the colour structure from an
image or motion in the case of continuous image frames or video. The four subcategories in low-level analysis are edges, colour information, grey information, and motion.
[11]
Skin colour is one of the features that could separate the human face from the background of an image. Unlike many objects human skin colour is consistent [12] and this

8

feature is same for all skin tones [8]. The colour information of an image is used to localize the area from the image where the face is. Tracking the colour from an image is
more efficient than tracking certain facial features but at the same time colours can be
easily affected by changes of light [11]. The colour information itself is not enough when
searching side-view faces [13]. Th e accuracy of this method is dependent on stabile
lightning conditions and the face must be photographed from the front.
More simpler colour information model is grey information of an image (grey images).
In grey image the information is more limited because the grey scales only describe the
intensity of the light in certain point of an image. The grey scale values around the face
shape, edges and facial features are darker and other surrounding regions are lighter
[11]. These contrasts are used to find the face in general and it could be as well to find
certain facial features [14]. Compared to the skin colour method the information is only
two dimensional which make the data computationally simpler. On the other hand, it is
less efficient to process grey information and the data contains relatively more noise.
[11] In this thesis the recorded footage is not grey scale so this method can’t be applied
in this case.
Edges are part of an image where the intensity values change rapidly. Since there is clear
signs of what edges represent can they be used as detection method. Edges are one of
the earliest techniques used in computer vision [11]. The edges of an image could be
analysed separately from other information by forming so called edge image [15]. In the
edge image the parts where the intensity changes rapidly the value of the value of the
pixel is high as seen in Figure 3.2: in black and white pixel it means white.


Figure 3.3 Edge Image [14]

The surrounding points are black which means that all the useless information is deleted
from the picture and the edge information is only information left. Information of this
picture is used to find the face from an image. Pro of the edge detection method is that

9

there is only needed minimal account of scanning to find the face [16]. The negative side
is that from noise image the edge detection does not work well because the clear intensity differences are more difficult to find from a noise image which means that the edges
can’t be found efficiently [11]. This problem can be avoided by using some noise erasing
filter before the edge detection.
Last one of the low-level analysis methods is motion-based method. Motion being the
parameter to use detecting the face there needs to be number of continuous image
frames or video sequences [11]. Motion could be analysed few different ways. In frame
variance analysis the face containing moving part is recognized by limiting the gathered
difference of the frame [11].  The main thing is to analyse if the motion comes from a
person and if so, find the position of the head. There are few assumptions that could be
applied in this situation: first the head is smaller part placed in above larger part (the
body) and second the movement of the head is slow and contiguous. [17]
Other often used, a bit newer method, is called optical flow. It could be defined as the
individual pixel’s apparent motion on the image plane [18]. Analysis with optical flow is
based on estimating the apparent brightness velocity. The face detection starts by detecting the movement of the face and the found information is used to separate the face
from the images [19]. The positive things in motion-based method are that it uses only
one main parameter to detect the wanted feature and it could be used in the real-time
environment. This method could be considered one of the face detection methods when
creating the demo code because of its focus on especially video footage.

3.3
Neural networks
Neural networks (NNs) are part of machine learning and one of the key elements of deep
learning. NNs got their name and structure from the human brain’s structure [9], more
specifically from the way neurons are connected and messaging to each other [20]. In
general, neural network contains nodes, which are connected to each other and together these nodes form layers. Figure 3.3 shows how the nodes are constructed and
how the output values are calculated: each node has some input xn and weight value wn
which are calculated together and after all weight values have been added to the inputs
the bias term b is added to those values and in the end a non-linear activation function
is used to calculate the final output. In neural networks these nodes are connected to
each other forming input layer, hidden layer(s) and output layer as shown in figure 3.4.

10




One of the most important functions related to Neural networks is Loss function. Loss
function is the way to evaluate how good performance the NN has in certain task. The
intuitive way to calculate the loss to perform the task to every training sample, calculate
the difference between the correct label and the label from the model, sum these differences together and divide the sum with the number of the samples [21]. The smaller
Loss function value means better performance of the NN.
Before NN can be used in a classification task, it needs to be trained. In training the
network is taught to find certain patterns. In the beginning of the training the weight
values are initialized randomly [21]. The loss function is used to evaluate the performance of the network in each part of training. The updating in the NN happens in weight
values: the gradient is calculated from the loss function result and this gradient is used
to calculate the new weight values. This goes on until the loss function result is minimized. The training referred in this thesis is presented in Chapter 5.
3.4
Convolutional neural network
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are neural networks which hidden layers contains
convolutional layers. The basic architecture of the CNN contains three layers: convolutional layers, pooling layers and fully-connected layers. The basic structure of simple
CNN is presented in figure 3.5.
Figure 3.4 Node’s structure
Figure 3.5 NN's structure

11


Figure 3.6 CNN’s structure
The input matrix is first handled by convolutional layer. The name of the network comes
from this layers’ convolution operation used in this layer. Discrete convolution can be
defined mathematically as

                                               𝑦(𝑡) = (𝑥∗𝑊)(𝑡) = ∑𝑥(𝑎)𝑊(𝑡−𝑎)
∞
𝑎=−∞
(3.2)

where x is the input value, W is the kernel and value y is the output [22]. The kernel
could be described as a matrix or mask which is used as a function in each image pixel
and its neighbourhood. The kernel covers only part of the input matrix, but it spreads
along the whole input. Same time when the kernel goes through input matrix, the scalar
product foreach value are calculated. The example of simple kernel computation in convolutional layer is presented in figure 3.6. During these calculations kernels are taught
the ‘”fire” when the specific feature is seen at the given position of the input [23].  After
the activation/feature maps are created using Kernel map the rectified linear unit (ReLU)
is used as an activation function. Basic functionality of ReLU is that it returns value 0 if
the input value is less than 0 and otherwise it returns the input value itself. ReLU is used
in convolutional networks to add non-linearity of the data set [24].


12


Figure 3.7 Simple convolutional computation

Second layer type in CNN is pooling layer. The main idea of the pooling layer is to reduce
the number of the dimensionality and thus the computational complexity and number
of parameters are reduced as well [23]. The convolutional layer produces feature maps
as an output and these feature maps are handled by the pooling operation. The pooling
mask as the kernel mask is smaller than the feature maps and it goes through the maps
same way as the kernel does in convolutional layer.
There are two most used pooling operation: max-pooling and average pooling. In max
pooling the pooling mask goes through the feature maps choosing the maximum value
from each patch. These values form the output maps from the pooling layer. The amount
of the pooling maps is the same as in convolutional layer although the maps are smaller.
In average pooling the idea is to calculate the average of the patch values and put these
average values in the pooling maps.
Fully connected layer is mostly last layer of CNN before the output layer. In fully connected layers a linear transformation to the input vector is used by using the weight
matrix. After that non-linearity (usually ReLU) is used to transform the data in more nonlinear form [25]. The structure of the fully connected layer is close to the basic neural
networks structure. The main idea of the fully connected layer is to take result of the
convolution/pooling layer and make a classification decision.

3.5
Multitask convolutional neural network
In this thesis the pretrained model for face detection is based on multitask convolutional
neural network (MTCNN). The network uses three different network layers: p-net, R-Net
and o-net. The whole process starts with resizing the image to different scales and use
those resized image scales to form image pyramid [26]. After the image pyramid is
formed the p-net starts to process it. P-net uses a full connected convolution as a basic
algorithm structure [26]. It is used to find possible target area frames from the image
pyramid. Figure 3.7 shows that first the 3x3 convolution and 2x2 max pooling is used to
input data. After that the output data goes twice through 3x3 convolution and after the

13

last convolution the data is divided in face classification, bounding box regression and
facial landmark localization data.


Figure 3.8 P-net structure

After p-net has found candidate frames from the image the R-net goes through the candidates and selects most suitable options and excludes most of the negative examples.
R-net has more complex structure than p-net: the upper layer contains more constraint
conditions, and it contains one more full connection layer at the end [26]. As seen from
figure 3.8 the input data is processed twice using 3x3 convolution and 3x3 max pooling.
After last convolution layer the data goes in fully connected layer where the data is simplified.

Figure 3.9 R-net structure

Last of the three network layers is output network, shortly o-net. O-net’s structure is
close to the R-net’s structure which could be noticed when comparing figures 3.8 and
3.9. O-net continues R-net’s work by finding and selecting the best frame candidates and
detects five feature key points which outputs of the network [26]. O-net has deeper
structure since it has more convolutional and pooling layers. The input data is processed
first two times using 3x3 convolution and 3x3 max pooling and after that the 3x3 convolution and 2x2 max pooling is used. In the end the fully connect network is used to simplify the data and the data is divided in three categories (like in the first two networks).

14


Figure 3.10 O-net structure
During the MTCNN algorithm process different size of rectangular frames are generated
in face data and find the features from the frames by sliding detection [24]. Since there
are many frames created there might be multiple frames from the same facial area. To
make the face detection more efficient the extra frames must be eliminated.
The Non-Maximum Suppression Algorithm (NMS algorithm) is used to selects the best
frame of the multiple frames of the same face area and eliminate the other ones. NMS
selects the candidate frame with highest confidence and calculates the Intersection
Over Union (IOU) values between the other frames and the candidate frame. The threshold is set and every frame which’s IOU value is bigger than the threshold is eliminated.
[24] NMS algorithm is used in the R-network to eliminate extra frames.
The network outputs show the three components what the MTCNN output contains:
face classification, face candidate frame regression and landmark localization. The main
content of the algorithm prediction are classification and frame regression. [26]
In the face classification the learning object is set as a binary classification problem and
the algorithm uses cross entropy loss function for each sample xi:

                             𝐿𝑖
𝑑𝑒𝑡= −(𝑦𝑖
𝑑𝑒𝑡log(𝑝𝑖) + (1 −𝛾𝑖
𝑑𝑒𝑡)(1 −log (𝑝𝑖)))                       (3.3)

pi is the sample xi predicted by NN probability of the face existence label of {0,1} [26]. 0
means that the image does not contain face and 1 indicates that the image contains a
face.
The predicted target frame is created by using bounding box regression algorithm.  Fourdimension vector (x,y,w,h) is used to create the prediction window around the face area.
The x and y values of the vector tell where the upper left corner of the window is and w
and h represent the width and the height of the window. The difference square loss
function is used to calculate the difference between the predicted frame and the nearest
ground truth [24]:
                                                                 𝐿𝑖
𝑏𝑜𝑥= ‖𝑦𝑖−𝛾𝑖
𝑏𝑜𝑥‖
2                                         (3.4)
As in every NN the MTCNN must be trained before it could be used in face detection
from real data. The training and the datasets are more closely presented in Chapter 5.

15

4. FACE FEATURE DETECTION AND CLASSIFI-
CATION
After the face is found in the picture, the next step is to find the facial features from
the face. Facial features are parts of the face such as mouth, eyes, or eyebrows. The
feature extraction can be called the core of the facial expression recognition (replace
later with FER), because the facial expressions are usually predicted using facial features [27]. The point of extracting facial features is to create the representation of the
face components with minimum face information loss [28].
The face feature extraction is important part of the facial expression recognition since
they are used to produce the facial expressions. The Facial Action Coding System
(FACS) defines the facial movements of human face by their appearance of the human
face. These action units (AUs) are the parts of the face which together form certain facial expression [29]. AUs are linked with facial features since most of the actions are related to moving certain feature (for example inner brow raiser). Combined movements
of the different facial muscles display emotional reaction in face: for example, cheek
raiser and lip corner puller AUs form together facial expression of joy [29]. When the
program is analysing the apathy of the facial expressions the AUs and facial features
are main things to focus on.
When the face features have been found, the extracted information is used to determine the facial expressions. Classification algorithm is trained with labelled facial data
and the model is created based on that. After training the classification algorithm need
to be evaluated to find out the possible mistakes from the training data and correcting
the model before taking it in real action. Chapter 4.1 presents in the demo program
used feature detection model and chapter 4.2 presents the classification model used in
this thesis.
4.1
Face feature detection
Facial features are the part of the face where the focus is when analysing facial expressions. The pretrained practical facial landmark detector (PFLD) [30] is used in this thesis
to find the facial landmarks. The PFLD’s structure and methodology are next presented
more closely.
When the goal is to create detector with good accuracy the loss function’s quality is
important thing to focus on. The simplest way to calculate the loss is to take the groundtruth landmarks and predicted landmarks and calculate the differences between those.
The problem with this is that it does not consider the geometric information: the distances between the real 3D world and the applied 2D image could be significantly different. [30] The geometric information must be considered when calculating the loss.
The general form of the loss function is:

16

                                              ℒ≔1
𝑀∑∑𝛾𝑛‖𝑑𝑛
𝑚‖
𝑁
𝑛=1
𝑀
𝑚=1
                                                     (4.1)
where the length of the d is the measurement of the distance of the n-th landmark of
the m-th input. N is the pre-defined landmark number per face to be found. M is the
number of the training images which are used in each process. The value γn is the weight
value. [30] The novel loss function is:
                               ℒ≔1
𝑀∑∑(∑𝜔𝑛
𝑐∑(1 −𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃𝑘
𝑛)
𝐾
𝑘=1
𝐶
𝑐
) ‖𝑑2
2‖
𝑁
𝑛=1
                          (4.2)
𝑀
𝑚=1

The θ1, θ2 and θ3 (K=3) values represents the angles of the differences between the yaw,
pitch and roll angles of the ground-truth and the estimations. The value c represents
which attribute class the sample belongs: profile-face, frontal-face, head-up, headdown, expression and occlusion. The number of samples in class c defines the weighting
parameter. [30] The complex model of the loss function is taking account the geometrical structure and, in that way, grows the accuracy of the model.

Figure 4.1 PFLD network structure [30]
The PFLD model consists of two subnetworks. The first one is called Backbone network
and its main task is to find the facial landmark coordinates from the image. The second
network is called Auxiliary Network and it focuses on the geometric information estimation [30]. The structure of the whole network is presented in Figure 4.1: the lower
branch describes the backbone network, and the upper branch describes the auxiliary
network.
The backbone network uses several convolutional layers for feature extraction and landmark prediction. Since the human face has strong global structures such as symmetry
and spacial relationships among facial features (eyes, nose, etc.) they could be used
when localizing the landmarks. For this reason, the feature maps’ structure is multi-scale

17

instead of single scale. This means that the convolutional operations are executed step
by step to enlarge the receptive field. [30]
Since there is bottleneck in terms of processing speed and model size [30] the traditional
convolutional operations are replaced with MobileNet blocks. MobileNet uses depthwise separable convolution [31]. In standard convolution filters and combines the inputs
into new outputs in one step. In depthwise separable convolution the standard convolution is factorized: first the depthwise convolution applies a filter in each output and
after that the 1x1 pointwise convolution is used to combine the filtered results from
depthwise convolution [31]. The factorization divides the convolutional layer in half: one
separate layer for filtering and one for combining. The ReLU nonlinearities are used in
both layers [31]. The convolution factorization reduces computation and model size
which is the main reason why it is used in the PFLD model.
 The auxiliary network’s role in the model is to estimate the 3D rotation information
such as yaw, pitch and roll angles [30].  With this information the posture of the head
can be determined. There are three steps when calculating the rotation information.
First one standard face is predefined forming average from number of frontal faces and
11 landmarks are fixed on the standard face [30]. These fixed landmarks are then used
to find the corresponding ones from the training samples.
 The corresponding landmarks and the ones from the training sample are used to the
rotation matrix estimation. From the rotation matrix the Euler angles (yaw, pitch, and
roll) can be calculated. [30] The rotation information is estimated from the difference
between the reference frontal face pose and the real samples pose. By using the landmarks, the difference between the locations of them can be used to determine how the
head pose differs from the frontal face pose. This gives the opportunity to analyse more
varied facial data: the face does not have to be filmed right from the front to locate the
facial landmarks.
4.2
Residual Masking Network for FER
In this thesis, the facial expressions are recognized with pretrained model called Residual Masking Network (RMN). The method is based on basic CNN but the residual masking is added to boost the network’s performance [32]. The basic structure of the RMN is
presented in figure 4.2.

18


Figure 4.2 RMN's structure [32]

 First the input image goes through the 3x3 convolutional layer and 2x2 max-pooling
layer. The output feature maps from the pooling layer goes through four residual masking blocks. After these four blocks the feature maps goes through average pooling layer
and last fully-connected layer calculates output values which are some of the seven facial expressions (happy, angry, sad, fear, disgust, surprise, neutral).
Residual masking blocks are built from two parts: residual layer and masking block. Input
feature map goes first in residual layer (figure 4.3) where new feature map is calculated.
[32] The residual layer uses convolutional layers inside it but the difference from traditional neural network is that the information from certain layer is not only used in the
next layer but also in 2-3 hops away from the next layer. The residual connections are
used mainly because the extra layers can be skipped when using residual connections
[33].

Figure 4.3 Residual layer’s structure

After the feature map is produced in residual layer, the same size activation map which
has value between 0 and 1 is calculated in masking block using 𝐹𝑀 = 𝑀(𝐹𝑅).  Masking

19

box contains encoder and decoder. In encoder side the masking box has convolutional
and pooling layers and decoder side there are down-sampling and convolutional layers.
The masking box uses various number pooling and down-sampling layers depending on
the spatial size of the feature map in residual layer’s input. [32]


Figure 4.4 Masking block [32]

The output feature map 𝐹𝑁 comes from the model by calculating the output value from
the residual layer and from the masking layer together. The formula for the calculation
is:

                                        𝐹𝑁= 𝐹𝑅+ 𝐹𝑅⊗𝐹𝑀                                                                       (4.3)

where 𝐹𝑅 is the output feature map from residual layer, 𝐹𝑀 is the output of the masking
box and ⊗ describes element-wise multiplication between masking box and residual
layer outputs. [32] RMN is also trained and estimated to make it perform as good as
possible. More about the datasets and training in general is in chapter 5.1.



20

5. DEMO
As noticed in the 2nd chapter, one of the most common single symptoms that affects
facial expressions is apathy.  Because there is clear correlation between apathy and facial expression changes this symptom can be base of our demo program.
Most of the existing FER programs are based on six universal expression classes: anger,
disgust, fear, happy, sad, and surprised. Because of that the demo program in this thesis
classifies and analyses the facial expressions in these six categories. The apathy affects
especially in the facial expressiveness which means that the apathy reduces production
of facial expressions. Since the person suffering apathy products fewer facial expressions
the measurement in the demo program is the intensity of the facial expression. In this
reason the certain facial expression itself is not as interesting as the intensity of the certain facial expression. The challenge when measuring intensity of the facial expression
is to find the limit between people with and without apathy.
The demo code is made by using Python Facial Expression Analysis Toolbox (Py-FEAT).
The Py-FEAT contains several different pretrained models to face detection, facial landmark detection, Action Unit analysis and emotion recognition [34]. Since the models are
pretrained they are ready to be used to analyse the facial expressions. The toolbox contains image and video footage which could be use but in this thesis the analysis is made
by using self-made video footage. Chapter 5.1 contains information about the training
datasets used training the pretrained detectors and training evaluation in general level.
The code implementation and FER analysis results are presented in chapter 5.2.

5.1
Pretrained detectors
For face detection the used detector is MCNN detector. MCNN network’s structure was
presented in chapter 3.4, but the environment and training used when developing the
detector is presented here shortly. The MCNN is created by using Python as programming language and PyCharm as experimental debugging platform. Functions from
OpenCV library was used to create the face detection boxes around the faces. The training dataset which was used to train the model is called the wider dataset which contains
61 event categories. The training, evaluating, and testing samples were chosen randomly from each category. The percentual division between the samples were 40 %
training, 10 % evaluating and 50 % testing. [26]
Facial landmark detector is in chapter 4.1 presented PFLD model. The detector is trained
by using two datasets: 300W and AFLW. 300W dataset contains five datasets with 68
facial landmarks. 3148 images were used in model training and 689 images in model

21

testing. Testing images are divided in common subset images (554) and challenging subset images (135). AFLW contains 24386 images of in-the-wild human faces which are
from Flickr. These images have extreme poses expressions and occlusions and point is
to teach the model to find facial landmarks more than just frontal face images. [30]
Normalized mean error (NME) is used to measure the accuracy in the training process
30]. General formula for the NME is followed:

                           𝑁𝑀𝐸(𝑆, 𝑆∗) = 1
𝑁∑
‖𝑠𝑖−𝑠𝑖
∗‖2
2
𝐿
𝑁
𝑖=1
                                                (5.1)

S describes the ground-truth and S* describes model prediction. The difference between
ground-truth points and model prediction results are calculated and it is divided by normalized factor L. In this model the predicted points are the facial landmarks. For 300W
there are two normalizing factors: eye-centre distance and outer-eye-corner distance
and for ALFW dataset the error is normalized by the ground-truth bounding box over all
visible facial landmarks [30].
The residual masking network is used to detect the emotional facial expressions. The
structure is presented in chapter 4.2 and the network training setup is presented next.
Two datasets were used in training process: FER2013 and Vietnam Emotion
(VEMO2020). FER2013 contains total 35887 grey-scale images (28709 train samples,
3859 validation samples and 3589 test samples). Google image search API was used to
collect the image data and all of them were labelled in one of the seven emotion categories (6 basic emotions + neutral).  VEMO2020 contains 36470 images divided in two
parts. First patch of the images is selected from YouTube video frames, Google Image
and Flickr. The emotion labels have been chosen by group voting (10 persons, 18-23
years old). Other image patch contains 30000 images which were labelled using professional in emotion labelling. [32]
The classification is evaluated by using following accuracy metric:

          𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦=
𝑇𝑃+ 𝑇𝑁
𝑇𝑃+ 𝑇𝑁+ 𝐹𝑃+ 𝐹𝑁                                                 (5.2)

where TP describes amount of true positive labels, TN true negative labels, FP false positive labels and FN false negative labels [32].

22

5.2
Implementation and results
The idea of the demo program is to present how FER analysis could be used while searching memory disorder. Apathy was chosen to be the symptom to focus on when analysing
the data which the program produces. The program analyses two videos: first video
shows spontaneous emotional reactions and in second one the facial expressions are
neutralized trying to imitate the lack of facial expressiveness. The reactions for the first
video were triggered by using funny animal video. To get the two videos as similar as
possible the same video was watched while filming the second video. The intensity of
the facial expressions was controlled to mimic the apathy’s effect of facial expressions.
The program starts by creating the detector. The detector constricts in five partial detectors: face detector, facial landmark detector, AU detector, facial pose detector and
emotion detector. After the detector is constructed the video paths were saved and the
predictions of both videos were calculated using the detector. The detector calculates
the values of the face box (face detector), landmark values and AU & emotion predictions. The data from the detector can be plotted in different ways and the differences
between the two videotapes can be analysed from the plotted information.


Figure 5.1 Aggregated data from the spontaneous video

Figure 5.1 presents aggregated data from one frame (frame 48) of the first video where
the reactions for the funny content were spontaneous. All data from the detector is presented except for the face pose information. The left image presents the image frame
from the video where the face is surrounded by the face box and the facial landmarks
are presented with white lines. In the middle predictions of the action units are presented and in the right there are predictions of the facial expressions. In this frame the
prediction of the emotions shows that the emotional reaction of the frame is happiness.

23


Figure 5.2 Aggregated data from the apathy video

Figure 5.2 presents the same aggregated information from one image frame of the second video where the reactions were imitating more the lack of facial expressions. Since
both videos were created watching the same video the reaction of same part of the
video is seen in the same image frame in both videos. In this case the chosen frame from
the videos was frame 48. The emotional reaction of the apathy video’s image frame is
categorised as neutral which is the category where the facial expression goes if it can’t
be categorised in any of the six basic categories. None of the predictions of the AUs
related to emotional reactions are over 0.50 which means that facial muscles are in neutral stage.

One frame of the video is not good enough when analysing facial expression more general way. Person can only have neutral face in one frame of the video and in some other
frame the facial expressions are stronger. The data of the AUs and facial expressions is
needed from the whole video to find the difference. Let’s first compare the whole AU
information of both videos. Figures 5.3 and 5.4 presents the predicted AUs from the
videos. The biggest difference between the AU data is that the first video has more specific AU values over 0.6 which means that there are movement in specific AUs which is
stronger than others. In the second video most of the AU predictions are gathered
around 0.6 and under which means that there is no significantly strong movement in
AUs.

24


Since the facial expression try to be triggered is happiness the focus should be in the
AUs which are used to produce facial expression of happiness. These AUs are AU06
(cheek raiser) and AU12 (lip corner puller) [35]. Figure 5.5 presents the difference between these AUs in first and second video. The blue line presents the prediction of the
AU06 in first video, the green line AU12 in first video, orange line AU06 in second video
and red line AU12 in second video. AU predictions from the second video stay under 0.2
the whole video which means that the activation in happiness producing AUs is not happening. In the first video instead the AUs are clearly repeatedly activating during the
trigger.

m
m
m



Figure 5.4 AU Predictions from the
apathy video
Figure 5.3 AU Predictions from the
spontaneous video

25



Figure 5.5 AU06 and AU12 predictions from both videos

The last thing to compare between the videos is the predicted emotions. Figures 5.6 and
5.7 shows the emotion predictions from both videos. In the first video the strongest
emotion is happiness. In those parts where the happiness value decreases little the neutral emotion value is stronger. In the second video all the six emotions stay close to zero
the whole video while the neutral emotion value is stable and close to 1 the whole video.








Figure 5.6 Emotion predictions from the
spontaneous video
Figure 5.7 Emotion predictions from
the apathy video

26

It can be concluded from this that in first video the facial expressions are presented normally and in other video the lack of facial expressions is shown as low values of emotion
predictions and strong value of neutral facial expression. Neutral facial expression describes the situation where there is no certain visible facial expression in the face. Since
the neutral value stays through the whole video strong, there are very minimum facial
expressions shown in the whole video. The neutral expression and its relationship with
other emotions could be the key when figuring out the possibility of existing memory
disorder.



27

6. CONCLUSION
The goal of this thesis was to show how the FER analysis could be used in a search of
memory disorder. The demo program showed that the information to focus on FER analysis are the predictions of the AUs and the predicted facial expressions. The neutral expression is good addition to estimate the intensity of certain facial expression. By comparing the prediction value of the certain facial expression and neutral facial expression,
the intensity of the certain facial expression can be estimated. When the certain facial
expression is weaker the prediction value of that expression gets smaller and at the
same time the neutral facial expression prediction value gets bigger. The relationship
between these prediction values shows how strong the facial expression is. The program
code is available on GitHub1.
Even though the analysis shows pretty good performance while searching weakening of
facial expressions there are still few issues to concern about. First, the facial expressiveness is a unique feature and people have differences in intensity of facial expressions.
This means that there is no universal model to note the apathy but the reference material from the analysed person is needed to determine the state. FER analysis is not efficient detector for person with more restrained facial expression since the difference
between the facial expressions before and during the apathy is extremely small. Secondly, the trigger selection can be difficult since the concept of funny/sad/infuriating
content is very subjective. This could be avoided by personating the trigger somehow:
for example, in few of the apathy studies the emotional reactions were triggered by
asking the subjects to tell two personal memories/stories (positive and negative).
The research in this field is still limited and more information of the topic is needed. Up
to this point the only research done with FER analysis is to find out if the differences in
memory disorder patients exist at all. Future research should focus more to identifying
the differences and creating models based on them. After these models are tested and
approved FER analysis can be used as a detector of memory disorders.






1https://github.com/rsjuru/FER_co
de.git

28

REFERENCES
[1]
“Memory Disorders”, Premier Health, 2023. Available: https://www.premierhealth.com/services/neuroscience/memory-disorders (visited on 20.02.2023)
[2]
“Dementia”, OECD Health Statistics 2021, 2021. Available: https://www.oecdilibrary.org/sites/bf0d1884-en/index.html?itemId=/content/component/bf0d1884en (visited  on 24.02.2023)
[3]
R. Zeghari, A. König, R. Guerchouche, G. Sharma, J. Joshi, R. Fabre, P. Robert, & V. Manera, “Correlations Between Facial Expressivity and Apathy in Elderly People With Neurocognitive Disorders: Exploratory Study” JMIR formative
research, 5(3), e24727, 2021. Available: https://doi.org/10.2196/24727 (visited
on 07.03.2023)
[4]
U. Seidl, U. Lueken, P. A. Thomann, A. Kruse and J.  Schröder ,“Facial Expression in Alzheimer’s Disease: Impact of Cognitive Deficits and Neuropsychiatric
Symptoms”, American Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Dementias,
Updated 01.04.2012, 2012. DOI: 10.1177/1533317512440495
[5]
J. Gerłowska, K. Dmitruk & K. Rejdak. Facial emotion mimicry in older adults
with and without cognitive impairments due to Alzheimer's disease. AIMS neuroscience, 8(2), 226–238, 2021. Available: https://doi.org/10.3934/Neuroscience.2021012 (visited on 07.03.2023)
[6]
S.L. Happy, A. Dantcheva, A. Das, R. Zeghari, P. Robert & F. Bremond, “Characterizing the State of Apathy with Facial Expression and Motion Analysis”, IN-
RIA Sophia Antiplosis Fance & CoBTeK, Memory center CHU, University Cote
d’Azur, association IA, France, 2019. Available:  http://antitza.com/apathy_1.pdf
(visited on 07.03.2023)
[7]
Z. Jiang, S. Seyedi, R. U. Haque, A. L. Pongos, K. L. Vickers, C. M. Manzanares, J. J. Lah, A. I. Levey, G. D. Clifford, “Automated analysis of facial emotions in subjects with cognitive impairment”, PLOS ONE, San Francisco, California, US, Published: 21.01.2022. Available: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0262527 (visited on 10.03.2023)
[8]
Q. M. Rizvi, “A Review on Face Detection Methods”,Journal of Management Development and Information Technology. 11, 2021. Available: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/257338580_A_Review_on_Face_Detection_Methods (visited on 11.03.2023)
[9]
N. Kumar, Digital Image Processing Basics, GeeksForGeeks, Updated:
22.02.2023. Available: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/digital-image-processingbasics (visited on 16.04.2023)
[10]
Difference between Image Processing and Computer Vision, GeeksForGeeks,
Updated: 03.11.2022. Available: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/difference-between-image-processing-and-computer-vision (visited on 18.04.2023)

29

[11]
M. K. Hasan,Md. S. Ahsan, Abdullah-Al-Mamun,S. H. S. Newaz & G. M. Lee,
“Human Face Detection Techniques: A Comprehensive Review and Future Research Directions” Electronics, 10(19), 2354. MDPI AG., 2021. Retrieved from
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/electronics10192354 (visited on 20.02.2023)
[12]
Q. Liu & G. Peng, "A robust skin color-based face detection algorithm," 2010
2nd International Asia Conference on Informatics in Control, Automation and
Robotics (CAR 2010), Wuhan, 2010, pp. 525-528, DOI:
10.1109/CAR.2010.5456614.
[13]
S. Naido and R. R. Porle, "Face Detection Using Colour and Haar Features for
Indoor Surveillance," 2020 IEEE 2nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Engineering and Technology (IICAIET), Kota Kinabalu, Malaysia,
2020, pp. 1-5. DOI: 10.1109/IICAIET49801.2020.9257813.
[14]
H. P. Graf, E. Cosatto, D. Gibbon, M. Kocheisen and E. Petajan, "Multi-modal
system for locating heads and faces," Proceedings of the Second International
Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition, Killington, VT, USA,
1996, pp. 88-93, DOI: 10.1109/AFGR.1996.557248.
[15]
A. Satish & N. Deverajan,  “Simple and Fast Face Detection System Based on
Edges”,  International journal of universal computer sciences. 1. 54-58., 2010.
Available: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/225292501_Simple_and_Fast_Face_Detection_System_Based_on_Edges/ (visited on
24.02.2023)
[16]
Computer Vision: Edge Detection, TeachingAI, Updated: 27.04.2020. Available:
https://teachingai.blog/2020/04/27/computer-vision-edge-detection/ (visited on
15.02.2023)
[17]
 A. Ranftl, F. Alonso-Fernandez and S. Karlsson, "Face Tracking Using Optical
Flow," 2015 International Conference of the Biometrics Special Interest Group
(BIOSIG), Darmstadt, Germany, 2015, pp. 1-5, DOI: 10.1109/BI-
OSIG.2015.7314604.
[18]
S. Du, Understanding Optical Flow & RAFT, Towards Data Science, 2020.
Available: https://towardsdatascience.com/understanding-optical-flow-raftaccb38132fba (visited on 15.02.2023)
[19]
B. Ahn, Y. Han and I. S. Kweon, "Real-time facial landmarks tracking using active shape model and LK optical flow," 2012 9th International Conference on
Ubiquitous Robots and Ambient Intelligence (URAI), Daejeon, Korea (South),
2012, pp. 541-543, DOI: 10.1109/URAI.2012.6463068.
[20]
 “What are neural networks?”, International Business Machines Corporation
(IBM), 2021. Available: https://www.ibm.com/topics/neural-networks (visited on
22.02.2023)
[21]
V. Bushaev, “How do we ‘train’ neural networks?”, Towards Datascience, Updated: 27.11.2017. Available: https://towardsdatascience.com/how-do-we-trainneural-networks-edd985562b73 (visited on 24.03.2023)
[22]
I. Goofellow, Y. Bengio & A. Courville, “Deep learning”, MIT Press, 2016. Available:  https://www.deeplearningbook.org (visited on 26.03.2023)

30

[23]
K. O’Shea and R. Nasch, An Introduction of Convolutional Neural Networks,
Cornell University, 2015. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.08458 (visited on
23.03.2023)
[24]
N. McCullum, The ReLU and Pooling Layers in Convolutional Neural Networks,
Nick McCullum, 2021. Available: https://www.nickmccullum.com/python-deeplearning/relu-layer-pooling (visited on 24.04.2023)
[25]
Fully Connected Layers in Convolutional Neural Networks, Indian Tech Warrior,
2020. Available: https://indiantechwarrior.com/fully-connected-layers-in-convolutional-neural-networks (visited on 24.04.2023)
[26]
N. Zhang, J. Luo and W. Gao, "Research on Face Detection Technology Based
on MTCNN," 2020 International Conference on Computer Network, Electronic
and Automation (ICCNEA), Xi'an, China, 2020, pp. 154-158, DOI: 10.1109/IC-
CNEA50255.2020.00040.
[27]
 V. Upadhyay and D. Kotak, "A Review on Different Facial Feature Extraction
Methods for Face Emotions Recognition System," 2020 Fourth International
Conference on Inventive Systems and Control (ICISC), Coimbatore, India, 2020,
pp. 15-19, DOI: 10.1109/ICISC47916.2020.9171172.
[28]
S. Rajan, P. Chenniappan, S. Devaraj, N. Madian, “Face expression recognition
techniques: a comprehensive survey”, The Institution of Engineering and Technology, Published: 07.05.2019. Available: https://doi.org/10.1049/ietipr.2018.6647 (visited on 23.02.2023)
[29]
B. Farnsworth, “Facial Action Coding System (FACS) – A Visual Guidebook”,
Research fundamentals, 2022. Available: https://imotions.com/blog/learning/research-fundamentals/facial-action-coding-system (visited on 15.04.2023)
[30]
X. Guo, S. Li, J. Yu, J. Zhang, J. Ma, L. Ma, W. Liu & H. Ling, “A Practical Facial
Landmark Detector”, Tianjin University, Wuhan University, Tencent AI Lab &
Temple University, 2019. Available: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1902.10859.pdf (visited
on 23.03.2023)
[31]
A. G. Howard, M. Zhu, B. Chen, D. Kalenichenko, W. Wang, T. Weyand, M. Andreetto, H. Adam, MobileNets: Efficient Convolutional Neural Networks for Mobile Vision Appilications, Google Inc. Published 17.04.2017. Available:
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1704.04861v1.pdf (visited on 24.03.2023)
[32]
L. Pham, T. H. Vu and T. A. Tran, "Facial Expression Recognition Using Residual Masking Network," 2020 25th International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), Milan, Italy, 2021, pp. 4513-4519, DOI:
10.1109/ICPR48806.2021.9411919.
[33]
S. Sahoo, Residual blocks – Building blocks of ResNet, Towards Data Science,
2018. Available: https://towardsdatascience.com/residual-blocks-buildingblocks-of-resnet-fd90ca15d6ec (visited on 26.03.2023)
[34]
E. Jolly, J. H. Cheong, T. Xie, L. J. Chang, Py-Feat: Python Facial Expression
Analysis Toolbox, PyFeat, 2022. Available: https://py-feat.org/pages/intro.html
(visited 16.03.2023)

31

[35]
E. Jolly, Action Unit Reference, PyFeat 2022. Available: https://pyfeat.org/pages/au_reference.html (visited on 23.03.2023)
