1
Facial emotion recognition tool for teleoperated
robot reminiscence group therapy for people with
dementia
Liu Xiangyu MAa,*, Yamazaki Ryuji PhDb, Kase Hiroko PhDc
aWaseda University, Japan; bInstitute for Open and Transdisciplinary Research Initiatives,
Osaka University, Japan; cSchool of Social Science, Western Sydney University, Australia;
*Corresponding author: dukeedison@fuji.waseda.jp
Abstract
Background: Historically, questionnaires and laboratory tests have been used to verify
reminiscence group therapy (RGT) efforts which are widely used methods for the nonpharmacological treatment of dementia. Today, facial expression recognition tools may be
applied in a noncontact, more objective, and efficient manner.
Objective: We propose to enhance such applications with more accurate databases and
higher performance-trained models to aid PWD in the future.
Method: Our study used the OpenCV-based AI facial emotion recognition tool to explore
the feasibility of emotional improvement for dementia RGT. Data from two intervention
experiments of teleoperated robot RGT conducted on people with dementia (PWD) were
analyzed. Experiments were conducted on six PWD in Tokorozawa, Saitama, and eight
PWD in Nakameguro, Tokyo. The Emo-Rec application showed a difference in trends
between the crossover method and the controlled trial.
Results: The trend for Experiment Tokorozawa was relatively flat compared with that of
Experiment Nakameguro. The overall group means were mostly below 10, indicating that
RGT was relaxing and enjoyable, and that participants’ moods improved over time.
Conclusion: Based on our data analysis of long-term interventions, we believe that a facial
emotion recognition tool is more objective for quantifying participants’ emotions, without
the need to use other instruments. More importantly, it does not suffer from cognitive bar­
riers for self-reports, questionnaires, or interviews.
Keywords: facial emotional recognition, reminiscence group therapy, teleoperated robot,
dementia
O r i g i n a l  R e s e a r c h
Introduction
Reminiscence group therapy (RGT) is one of the
most effective psychosocial interventions for
people with dementia (PWD). It is easy to or­
ganize, labor-saving, and has been used in many
elderly care facilities with additional props such
as memory books (Chao et al., 2006). RGT can
also reduce the behavioral and psychological
symptoms of dementia (BPSD) in participants, fa­
cilitating group communication, improving their
mood, and slowing down PWD’s social regres­
sion. Most studies verifying the effect of therapy
on participants have been conducted using ques­
tionnaires, such as the Mini-Mental State Exami­
nation (MMSE), the ADAS-cog, and the MoCA,
and for nursing staff, questionnaires like the NPI
DBD, among others (Cotelli et al., 2012). Studies
have verified the improvement in patients with
dementia using emotional questionnaires (e.g.,
the Face Scale) and linguistic analysis to validate
the effects of therapy (Kase et al., 2019).
Elderly adults with dementia also experience
rare medical conditions, such as proteinopa­
thy and dysfunctional brain proteins. This may
cause physical dysfunction, communication bar­
riers, or comprehension barriers. Consequently,
challenges to the questionnaire survey process
may emerge, thereby affecting the final results,
thus, causing bias (Irazoki et al., 2017; Rosa-
Neto, 2021). The emotional recognition of RGT
has received support as a new verification tool.
Researchers can use the expression recognition
results of RGT to grasp participants' emotions
and conditions and evaluate the effects of vari­
ous interventional experiments (Liu, 2021).
A comfortable and social atmosphere should be
maintained for PWD during RGT, and a contact­
less emotion analysis tool could help research­
ers better assess the effects of RGT in more di­
mensions. We propose mechanisms that could
improve the efficiency of evaluating RGT effec­
tiveness to facilitate further application of this
therapy in robotic cognitive care.
Liu et al., Gerontechnology (2023) 22:1
https://doi.org/10.4017/gt.2023.22.1.827.07

2
Facial emotion recognition tool
Method
Our study aimed to validate the usability of a fa­
cial emotion recognition tool for RGT using tel­
eoperated robotic experiments. Two experiments
were conducted. Expression data obtained via
teleoperation robot experiments with humans
and robots were compared and analyzed to
discuss the differences in emotion recognition
between human and robotic interactions. Two
robots, Telenoid and Pepper, were used.
The candidates were required to have basic com­
munication abilities and an overall tendency to
have milder MMSE scores. Experiment T was
conducted with six PWD (age = 87.5±5.76), with
an average MMSE score of 19 (range, 27–13), at a
low-cost nursing home in Tokorozawa, Saitama
as shown in Figure 1. From July 2018 to August
2018, all six PWD participated in RGT sessions
for 20 minutes, as follows: teleoperation robot
session (3 times) and human intervention (3
times). The other group’s sessions were conduct­
ed in reverse order for the cross-over interven­
tional experiment.
Experiment N was conducted with eight
PWD
(age=85.75±3.7(G1),
89.00±2.37(G2);
MMSE=15.25±4.85(G1), 17.25±12.21(G2).) in a
nursing home in Nakameguro, Tokyo, from De­
cember 4, 2020, to January 12, 2021, as shown
in Figure 2. Experiment N was conducted using
a controlled trial of human or teleoperated robot
groups, and PWD received a single interven­
tional approach. We compared the data from
the two interventional experiments separately
for humans and teleoperated robots, and the
Emo-Rec app was used to measure the emotion
ratings of the participants.
Emotional change is difficult to accurately cap­
ture over time, and the speed and direction of
change are difficult to predict (Albers & Bring­
mann, 2020). Nevertheless, by sampling multiple
times per experiment, it was possible to provide
a relatively accurate description of the overall
trend in participants’ emotions during each RGT
session. During the sampling phase, we marked
the timeframe in each RGT video by referring to
the random sequence given by SPSS 12 Com­

Figure 1. Telenoid and experiment T

Figure 2. Pepper and experiment N

3
Facial emotion recognition tool
patible and classified the frames of each video
using the Emo-Rec app to derive the proportion
of each emotion expressed by the participants.
According to the length of the video, we need
to generate a series of random numbers to de­
termine the specific number of seconds in the
video for sampling. We have adopted the ran­
dom number generation method in SPSS 12. For
example, if the duration of the video data is 10
minutes, 9 random numbers from 1 to 600 will
be generated. And use the number of seconds
corresponding to the random number to extract
the time frames to complete the sampling.
OpenCV-based open-source tools were used to
quantify and analyze PWD’s mood swings in so­
cial environments. The results were divided into
seven categories of expression: neutral, anger,
contempt, disgust, fear, happiness, and sadness.
We converted the seven emotions detected by
the Emo-Rec app into a binary ratio of "happy–
sad" dimensions that were retained and then di­
vided into a scale, scored from 1 to 20 accord­
ing to the Face Scale (Lorish & Maisiak, 1986).
Finally, the Emo-Rec point was calculated using
the following formula:
Emo-Rec
point=(anger*10)
+
(disgust*10)
+ (scare*10) + (happy*1) + (sad*20) + (sur­
prise*10) +(neutral*10)
The output result of Emo-Rec App is expressed
in percentage matching degree. The ratio given
by the Emo-Rec App can ensure that the sum
of the ratios of each emotion is always 100%.
Through this formula and the ratio given by the
app, we can get a range of 1-20. For example,
happy100% is 1, and sad 100% is 20. We used
this formula under the consideration of convert­
ing the output result into the more commonly
used Face Scale. This Scale is to obtain the true
feelings of PWD through a questionnaire survey
as shown in Figure 3.
Face Scale is also a scale commonly used to de­
scribe emotions and feelings in Japanese demen­
tia patients. We adopted this scale to facilitate
Figure 3. The Face Scale
Figure 4. Actual use of Emo-Rec Point

4
Facial emotion recognition tool
communication and coordination with facility
staff. We can imagine the 10 of the Emo-Rec
Point as 0, and the resulting range is between
-10 and 10. In order to compare the final Emo-
Rec Point with the widely used Face Scale, to
communication with facility nursing staff and to
continue discussing the result, we set it to 1-20.
The reason for setting this weight is also to try
to filter other emotions other than happy-sad, to
better match the Face Scale.
In the examples shown in the Figure 4, we cal­
culated the Emo-Rec Point through the formula
based on the emotion ratios given by the Emo-
Rec App on the right side, and then we can find
the approximate expression through the Face
Scale. For the upper example, the proportion of
happy is relatively high, and the Emo-Rec Point
is 2.2279. While, the one below is relatively
calm, and the result is 10.366.
The classification accuracy rate of the FER2013
dataset (another relatively complete classification
database) using the Emo-Rec application was 86%.
The validity of the scores obtained by the formula
were verified by conducting a questionnaire sur­
vey with experienced nurses and researchers to
manually score the participants on the frames. The
correlation of Spearman’s test in the two groups
was 0.863, and the intraclass correlation coeffi­
cient (ICC) was 0.835 (Liu et al., 2022).
All analyses were conducted using the IBM SPSS
Statistics R26 program, 64-bit version. Descriptive
data were used to test the differences in overall
mood between the two interventions. Finally, the
mean scores of the participants from each RGT
group were pooled to identify mood improvement
trends. This study complied with the requirements
of the Waseda Ethical Review Committee (ethical
review numbers 2017-173 and 2019-328).
Results
We pooled the overall Emo-Rec Points under
10 for the different intervention methods in the
two experiments. The Table 1 indicated that
participants’ facial expressions were likely to ex­
hibit more relaxed emotions when faced with a
teleoperated robot. The total under 10 propor­
tion for face-to-face participants were less than
those of the participants in the robot group. Ad­
ditionally, the people who tend to be emotion­
ally pleasant of Experiment T, were slightly more
than Experiment N.
We aggregated the average Emo-Rec Points of all
participants in each RGT in the two experiments
in Table 2, summarized them in the trend graph,
and expected to observe the effects of two dif­
ferent experimental settings on the participants'
emotions. We visualized the trend for Experi­
ment T was relatively flat compared with that of
Experiment N through the Figure 5. The overall
group means were mostly below 10, indicating
that RGT was relaxing and enjoyable, and that
participants’ moods improved over time.
Discussion
According to the statistical results in Table 1 for
points under 10, the number of people who felt
pleasure was significantly higher in the crosso­
ver setting of experiment T. However, the robot
group performed better in experiment N of the
controlled trial. The Robot group was also in a
dominant position in the overall data. This sug­
gests that interaction with a robot brings about a
more pronounced positive emotion than interac­
tion with a human operator. This is in line with
Heerink’s theory of “Perceived Enjoyment” , that
the pleasure of use arises when a decision has
been made to use a robot (Heerink et al., 2010).
Heerink organized a robot experiment to verify
the relationship between user enjoyment (Per­
ceived Enjoyment) and the willingness of the
elderly to use robots. In the model of Heerink’s
theories, Perceived Enjoyment was the key fac­
tor affecting the decision to use robots. This ex­
plains the relatively favorable
affective tendency of the robot
group found in the experiment.
The hedonic effects of new
technologies and products on
people are also mood-enhanc­
ing effects of robots.
The participants in Experiment
T experienced a crossover set­
10

13


5
Facial emotion recognition tool
ting of human and teleoperated robot experi­
ments in which the effect of alternating stimuli
was more pronounced and the mood tended
to be significantly more relaxed. Experiment N
involved a single stimulus in the controlled trial,
with both groups receiving a single intervention
with either a human or robot. Hence, the partici­
pants in Experiment N were at a disadvantage in
terms of their overall Emo-Rec point scores.
We visualized the trend for Experiment T was
relatively flat compared with that of Experiment
N through the Figure 5. Differences between
the two interventions led to different outcomes.
Overall, there was an improvement in partici­
pants’ mood during long-term RGT. Mood im­
provement was more pronounced in the robot
group than in the experimental group. This
shows that the process analysis of different ex­
perimental setups can be achieved using this tool.
Yamazaki et al. reported the therapeutic out­
comes of telenoid robots in facilitating PWD
conversations to improve dementia (Yamazaki
et al., 2019). According to Shibata et al., the im­
provement of the face scale is also considered
important for alleviating BPSD in the study of
teleoperated robots (Shibata & Wada, 2011). The
tool makes the process of emotional improve­
ment more intuitive and convenient. Helps care
giver adapt cognitive improvement strategies.
However, the facial recognition app did not per­
form well on the attention metric. In the future,
it is expected that eye movement recognition
equipment or other sensors can effectively re­
flect this type of data to provide researchers with
more dimensional references.
Conclusions
Based on our data analysis of long-term interven­
tions, we believe that a facial emotion recogni­
tion tool is more objective for quantifying partici­
pants’ emotions, without the need to use other
instruments. It is simpler and easier to use than
contact-based electroencephalogram (EEG) and
blood tests, and can be adjusted to achieve more
accurate results by adjusting the feature library of
the training datasets. More importantly, it does
not suffer from cognitive barriers for self-reports,
questionnaires, or interviews.
It has been reported that PWD who have under­
gone tracheostomy or have other vocal problems
can also benefit from this tool. They were able to
use expressions and gestures to engage in RGT
and achieve some degree of emotional improve­
ment (Liu et al., 2022). We propose further en­
hancement of such applications with more accu­
rate databases and higher-performance-trained
models to aid PWD in the future.
Figure 5. Trends of experiments T & N
Abbreviations
PWD, People With Dementia; RGT, Reminiscence
Group Therapy; BPSD, Behavioral and Psychologi­
cal Symptoms of Dementia; MMSE, Mini-Mental
State Examination; NPI, Neuropsychiatric Inventory;
DBD, Disruptive Behavior Disorder; MoCA, Mon­
treal Cognitive Assessment; ADAS-Cog, The Alzhei­
mer's disease assessment scale-cognitive subscale.
Conflicts of interest statement
All authors disclose no relevant relationships.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to express their gratitude to
Mr. Masato Yamazaki for his contribution in the de­
velopment of Pepper’s teleoperation system.
Funding/Support statement
This work was partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI
[grant numbers 19K11395, 19H01577].
References
Chao, S. Y., Liu, H. Y., Wu, C. Y., Jin, S. F., Chu, T. L., Huang,
T. S., & Clark, M. J. (2006). The effects of group remi­
niscence therapy on depression, self esteem, and
life satisfaction of elderly nursing home residents,
Journal Of Nursing Research, 14, 36-45. https://doi.
org/10.1097/01.jnr.0000387560.03823.c7.

6
Facial emotion recognition tool
Cotelli, M., Manenti, R., & Zanetti, O. (2012). Reminis­
cence therapy in dementia: A review. Maturitas,
72(3),
203-205.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.maturi­
tas.2012.04.008.
Kase, H., Yamazaki, R., Zhu, W., & Nishio, S. (2019).
Tele-operated android robot reminiscence group
therapy and human coordinated RGT for older
adults with dementia: a comparative study. Interna­
tional Journal Of Gerontology, Special issue s51(5),
https://doi.org/10.6890/IJGE.201910/SP.0008.
Irazoki, E., Garcia-Casal, J. A., Sanchez-Meca, J., &
Franco-Martin, M. (2017). Efficacy of group
reminiscence therapy for people with dementia:
systematic literature review and meta-analysis.
Revue Neurologique, 65, 447–456. https://doi.
org/10.33588/rn.6510.2017381.
Rosa-Neto, P. (2021). Journey through the diagnosis of
dementia, https://www.alzint.org/resource/worldalzheimer-report-2021/.
Liu, X. Y. (2021). Validation research on the application
of depthwise separable convolutional AI facial ex­
pression: recognition in non-pharmacological treat­
ment of BPSD. Journal Of Clinical Nursing Research,
5, 31-37. https://doi.org/10.26689/jcnr.v5i4.2325.
Albers, C. J., & Bringmann, L. F. (2020). Gradual and
abrupt changes in emotion dynamics with the timevarying change point autoregressive model. Euro­
pean Journal of Psychological Assessment, 36, 492-
499. https://doi.org/10.1027/1015-5759/a000589.
Lorish, C. D., & Maisiak, R. (1986). The face scale: a
brief, nonverbal method for assessing patient
mood. Arthritis Rheum, 29, 906–909. https://doi.
org/10.1002/art.1780290714.
Heerink, M., Krose, B., Evers, V, & Wielinga, B. (2010).
Assessing acceptance of assistive social agent tech­
nology by older adults: the Almere model. Interna­
tional Journal of Social Robotics, 2, 361–375.
Yamazaki, R., Kase, H., Nishio, S., & Ishiguro, H. (2019).
A conversational robotic approach to dementia
symptoms: measuring its effect on older adults. the
7th International Conference HAI'19, (Sep)110–117.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3349537.3351888
Shibata, T., & Wada, K. (2011). Introduction of field test
on robot therapy by seal robot, PARO. Journal of
the Robotics Society of Japan, 29(3), 246-249. htt­
ps://doi.org/10.7210/jrsj.29.246
Liu, X. Y., Yamazaki, R., & Kase, H. (2022). How to
measure the effect of reminiscence group ther­
apy on mute people with dementia?: A trial us­
ing a facial emotion recognition method. Ger­
ontechnology, 21(s), 671.https://doi.org/10.4017/
gt.2022.21.s.671.pp4
