Open Journal of Social Sciences, 2026, 14(2), 336-341
https://www.scirp.org/journal/jss
ISSN Online: 2327-5960
ISSN Print: 2327-5952

DOI: 10.4236/jss.2026.142022  Feb. 25, 2026
336
Open Journal of Social Sciences




Evaluation of Facial Expression by
AI Validate Impression of Elders
and Impression of Staffs
Michiyo Ando1, Yoko Hashimoto2, Takao Yamamoto3, Yoshika Suzaki4, Isamu Shigedomi5,
Chihiro Wakamatsu4
1Faculty of Psychology Counseling, Department of Child, Nishikyusyu University, Saga, Japan
2Facul Nursing, Department of Nursing, Nishikyusyu University, Saga, Japan
3Community Relations Department, MIZ Co., Ltd., Saga, Japan
4Faculty of Nursing, Department of Nursing, Daiichi University of Pharmacy, Fukuoka, Japan
5Faculty of Nursing and Nutrition, Department of Nursing, University of Nagasaki, Nagasaki, Japan



Abstract
Background: Evidence of effects by cosmetic therapy was obtained from
participants who answered the questionnaires in psychological studies, and we
need another method to validate. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to
clarify effects of cosmetic therapy, investigating changes in facial expression of
elders of nursing homes and analyzed by AI. Method: Elders with mild dementia
in two nursing homes received cosmetic therapy once by a certified specialist.
Elers put on makeup for themselves together following the specialist. The duration of cosmetic therapy was about one hour. They answered the questionnaires
about well-being before and after it. Researchers took pictures of them. AI analyzed photos. Elders and staff described impression. Results: Elders’ face changed
from calm, modest, suppressed, serious, tension and introverted to bright, open,
soft, lively, familiar, and diplomatic. Categories of elders’ impression were “Feeling good,” “Waking up,” and “Feeling beautiful.” Categories of staff’s impression
were “Promoting elder’s memory,” “Importance of doing by themselves,” “Elder’s
positive behavior,” “Reflecting staff’s assumption,” and “Staff’s new finding.”
Conclusion: Elders experience felt good or happy becoming bright and beautiful. Putting on makeup by themselves in cosmetic therapy makes elders active.
Staff found the ability of the elderly. Cosmetic therapy was useful for well-being
of elders in nursing homes.

Keywords
Cosmetic Therapy, Elders, Facial Expression, AI, Broaden-and-Build Theory
How to cite this paper: Ando, M., Hashimoto, Y., Yamamoto, T., Suzaki, Y., Shigedomi, I., & Wakamatsu, C. (2026). Evaluation of Facial Expression by AI Validate
Impression of Elders and Impression of
Staffs. Open Journal of Social Sciences, 14,
336-341.
https://doi.org/10.4236/jss.2026.142022

Received: January 21, 2026
Accepted: February 22, 2026
Published: February 25, 2026

Copyright © 2026 by author(s) and
Scientific Research Publishing Inc.
This work is licensed under the Creative
Commons Attribution International
License (CC BY 4.0).
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/


Open Access

M. Ando et al.


DOI: 10.4236/jss.2026.142022
337
Open Journal of Social Sciences

1. Introduction
The number of elderly people has been increasing every year, and the number of
elderly people with dementia is also increasing. Moreover, elders often feel depression or anxiety. Proposing some kind of intervention is needed. Cosmetic therapy
is one of the most useful interventions.
There are some studies about cosmetic therapy from physiological aspects
(Watanabe, 2013; Sakatani, 2015; Ikeuchi et al., 2017; Machida & Shirato, 2020),
particularly from the brain aspects. There are few studies about effects cosmetic
therapy from psychological aspects. Zhang et al. (2020) showed the impact of
routing skin care on the quality of life for new mothers. Participants were young
and effects were not clear for elders. Kawai et al. (2016) showed effects of cosmetic
therapy on subjective healthy feelings or depression for healthy elders living in the
communities. However, it was not clear about psychological effects cosmetic therapy for elders in nursing homes. Moreover, most psychological studies obtain data
from participants’ response to questionnaires. We needed to obtain data from another point. So, we try to get data from photos of participants and analyze them
by AI (Artificial Intelligence). And we get data by impression about putting on
makeup directly from participants and staff at nursing homes.
The purpose of this study was to investigate effects of psychological effects from
facial expression and impression through cosmetic therapy.
2. Method
2.1. Participants
The participants were 16 (1 male, 15 female) elders. The number of elderly people
was 5 people at 70 years, 9 people at 80 years, 2 people at 90 years. They were users
at nursing homes.
2.2. Cosmetic Therapy Program
The therapist was certified by Shiseido company with training. Tie cosmetic therapy
included the following program. 1) Explanation about cosmetic therapy, 2) Relaxation including stretch, 3) Skin care with massage of face, 4) and Make up.
2.3. Procedure
We recruited participants through facilities for the elderly two nursing homes.
The cosmetic therapy was one time session. Duration of the session was about 60
minutes. Researchers took pictures of participants. The size of a photo is mainly
face and neck like a passport size. The researcher asked to describe impression for
elders and staff.
2.4. Data Analysis
The engineer of the Kimura Information Company made the application using
AI. The researcher ordered the application and she did not program contents in

M. Ando et al.


DOI: 10.4236/jss.2026.142022
338
Open Journal of Social Sciences

detail. The application AI program analyzed photos pre and post cosmetic therapy
and showed results as sentences. About impression, since sentences were not so
many, we made code as the shortest meaningful sentence, and made categories as
a qualitative study.
2.5. Ethics
We performed this study in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. This
study was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of Nisikyusyu University
(25AVX22).
3. Results
We showed the results of (Table 1). AI program showed sentences about photos,
and we chose keywords. Lastly AI shows estimated mind state after putting on
makeup.

Table 1. Analysis by AI on elder’s photos pre and post putting on makeup.
ID
Key word (Pre)
Key word (Post)
Mind states after putting on makeup
1
calm, modest, introverted
bright, open, happy, delight
She experienced happiness and a sense of safety
through interaction with others.
2
tension, modest, suppressed
soft, familiar, bright,
Appearance change affected inner change, and she
had positive feeling with confidence.
3
neutral, tension, modest
relaxing, familiar peace of mind
Her mood improved and filled with mind.
It shows big positive change.
4
stiff, tension, suppressed
soft, modest, sense of security
She adapted to environment and open mind and
became happy. It shows positive change.
5
calm, modest, introverted
bright, familiar, active
She harmonized with surroundings and experienced
pure joy on stability. It shows delightful change.
6
tension, calm, suppressed
lively, bright, energetic
She experienced positive emotional change, and it
improves self-esteem and relationships with
surrounds.
7
serious, tension, calm
cheerful, warm, diplomatic
He experienced inner positive emotional change. It
shows changes to palliative of mind and delight.

Most impression after cosmetic therapy were positive contents. And mind state
was also positive.
Table 2 shows impression of cosmetic therapy by participants. There are 3 categories like “Feeling good,” “Waking up,” and “Feeling beautiful.”
Table 3 showed impression of cosmetic therapy from staff in the nursing home.
There are 5 categories like “Promoting elder’s memory,” “Importance of doing by
themselves,” “Elder’s positive behavior,” “Reflecting staff’s assumption,” and
“Staff’s new finding.”

M. Ando et al.


DOI: 10.4236/jss.2026.142022
339
Open Journal of Social Sciences

Table 2. Impression for cosmetic therapy from elders.
Category
Code
1) Feeling good
1) Puttin on makeup was fun.
2) Puttin on makeup was interesting.
3) It lifts my mood.
4) I found various effects on putting on makeup.
5) I will continue to put on makeup.
6) I recognize that putting on makeup makes me feel good.
2) Waking up
7) I was happy for the first time in ten years
8) I felt awake since I had not put on makeup because of
COVID-19.
3) Feeling beautiful
9) I rejuvenated.
10) I think that I am beautiful.
11) A color of the lip is to my liking.

Table 3. Impression for cosmetic therapy from staff.
Category
Code
1) Promoting elder’s memory
1) An elder remembered the cosmetic therapy next day, though she forgot things a
few minutes ago. Staff were surprised at it.
2) Importance of doing by themselves
2) Staffs thought that elders remembered putting on makeup because they put on
makeup by themselves.
3) Elder’s positive behavior
3) I found new aspects of elders.
4) We were impressed and surprised that elders could put on makeup by themselves,
following an instructor.
4) Reflecting staff’s assumption
5) Staffs presumed that elder can’t put on makeup by themselves, but they could. We
were impressed.
6) We make them try to do various things, not presumed.
7) Elders had great facial expressions. Staff felt that putting on
makeup affects elder’s inner self.
5) Staffs’ and families’ delight
8) Elders and families of them were glad.
9) We thank you for putting on makeup.
10) Family member of the elder was glad.
4. Discussion
4.1. Analysis of Photos by AI and Impression by Participants
Before cosmetic therapy, elders’ facial expressions were calm, stiff, neutral, suppressed, or introverted. However, after cosmetic therapy, their facial expressions
were bright, open, soft, energetic, or diplomatic. These changes support part of
Yoshida et al. (2007) in which participants enjoyed the cosmetic class and felt glad
or good mood. These positive change supports “The broaden-and-build theory”
by Fredrickson (2001). He demonstrated that positive emotion broadens his

M. Ando et al.


DOI: 10.4236/jss.2026.142022
340
Open Journal of Social Sciences

thinking or behavior and build behaviors connected with individual resources.
Cosmetic therapy in this study supports his theory.
Also, these positive changes were supported by categories of impression from
elders themselves. AI analysis was validated from their direct impression. “Feeling
good,” “Waking up,” and “Feeling beautiful.” “Waking up” relates with a sense of
touch,” and “Feeling beautiful” relates with a sense of sight. These effects is
cross modal of human sense. Elders felt various cross modal feelings. This feeling may hold their quality of life and prevent dementia. It supports Tagai (2021).
And, though Kawai et al. (2016) showed that cosmetic therapy affected well-being
of dwelling people, we can say that it makes elders happy feelings.
4.2. Effects for Staff at Nursing Home
Categories about impression were “Promoting elder’s memory,” “Importance of
doing by themselves,” “Elder’s positive behavior,” “Reflecting staff’s assumption,”
and “Staffs’ and Family’ delight.”
As for “Promoting elder’s memory,” it is a great finding that an elder remembered putting on makeup, though she tends to forget in a few minutes. It may be
because 1) putting on makeup was very fun and impressive, 2) she remembered
the long time habit of putting on makeup. Although Machida & Shirato (2020)
showed that three months cosmetic therapy prevent to decline cognitive function
comparing no make, we will show that cosmetic therapy may promote cognitive
function.
As for “Elder’s positive behavior,” elders who did not do by themselves tried to
put on makeup. It may be because they adopted to class environment and revitalized their selfcare ability. Tsutsumitani et al. (2008) showed that nail care with
aroma massage promoted Quality of Life including physical, psychological, and
social of elders. They say that nail care empowered vigor and had positive thinking. From the present study, cosmetic therapy made elders adapt class environment and revitalize selfcare ability.
As for “Reflecting staffs’ assumption,” sometimes staff think that elders can’t
do many things. However, in this study, staff found that elders have ability to put
on makeup by themselves. Cosmetic therapy at waked staffs thinkings.
As for “Staffs’ and family’s delight,” care workers or family who take care elders
sometimes feel burnout or stress. So, it is useful to care workers or family feel
delight to prevent burnout. This result support Yoshida et al. (2007) in which volunteers of cosmetic therapy experienced delight. We can think that positive emotions of elders affect staffs and family. By “The broaden-and-build theory” by
Fredrickson (2001), positive emotion may affect surrounds.
As limitations, the number of participants were small and we need to include
much more participants. And there was unbalance in the number of gender and
we need to balance. Many staffs felt that cosmetic therapy is useful, however, it
requires a specialist of putting makeup and much money for goods. In future, we
need to think these things.

M. Ando et al.


DOI: 10.4236/jss.2026.142022
341
Open Journal of Social Sciences

5. Conclusion
Cosmetic therapy was useful for well-being of elders in nursing homes. Their positive changes were validated by AI analysis or direct impression. This therapy affects staffs and family supporting the broaden-and build theory.
Funding
This study is supported by Dean’s Discretionary Expenses in Nishikyusyu University.
Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest regarding the publication of this paper.
References
Fredrickson, B. L. (2001). The Role of Positive Emotions in Positive Psychology: The
Broaden-And-Build Theory of Positive Emotions. American Psychologist, 56, 218-226.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066x.56.3.218
Ikeuchi, M., Saruwatariet, K., Takadaal, Y. et al. (2017). The Evaluation of an Effect of
“Cosmetic Therapy” by Using Near-Infrared Spectroscopy. Tokai University, School of
Health Sciences Bulletin, 23, 3-10.
Kawai, H., Inomata, T., Otsuka, R., Sugiyama, Y., Hirano, H., & Obuchi, S. (2016). The
Effectiveness of Beauty Care on Self-Rated Health among Community-Dwelling Older
People. Nippon Ronen Igakkai Zasshi. Japanese Journal of Geriatrics, 53, 123-132.
https://doi.org/10.3143/geriatrics.53.123
Machida, A., & Shirato, M. (2020). Effect of Cosmetic Therapy Evaluated by Changes in
Brain Activity. Fragrance Journal, 4, 23-29.
Sakatani, K. (2015). Effects of cosmetic Therapy on Cognitive Function in Elderly Women:
A Near Infrared Spectroscopy Study. In The 29th Annual conference of the Japanese
Society for Artificial Intelligence (pp. 1-2). The Japanese Society for Artificial Intelligence.
Tagai, K. (2021). The Science of Cosmetic Psychology and Behavior: Research on Cosmetics That Resonate with the Mind and the Skin. Journal of Japanese Cosmetic Science
Society, 45, 116-127.
Tsutsumitani, M. et al. (2008). Effects of Nailcare on Bio-Defense Function of Elderly People in AD Japanese Nursing Home. Cosmetology Research Report, 16, 76-86.
Watanabe, E. (2013). Psychophysiological Effects of Cosmetic Behavior in Healthy
Women. Cosmetology Research Reports, 21, 138-144.
Yoshida, S., Arakawa, S., Nakahata, M. et al. (2007). Spiritual Activation Induced by Cosmetic Therapy in Senile Dementia Women and Nursing Volunteers. Cosmetology Research Report, 15, 106-114.
Zhang, L., Adique, A., Sarkar, P., Shenai, V., Sampath, M., Lai, R. et al. (2020). The Impact
of Routine Skin Care on the Quality of Life. Cosmetics, 7, Article 59.
https://doi.org/10.3390/cosmetics7030059
