Vol.:(0123456789)
1 3
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13311-021-01172-w
REVIEW
Emotional and Neuropsychiatric Disorders Associated with Alzheimer’s
Disease
Kenneth M. Heilman1,3,4 · Stephen E. Nadeau2,3,4
Accepted: 16 December 2021
This is a U.S. government work and not under copyright protection in the U.S.; foreign copyright protection may apply 2022
Abstract
Alzheimer’s disease is associated with impairments in emotional communication including comprehension and production
of facial emotional expressions, comprehension of affective prosody, and alexithymia. It is also associated with disorders of
emotional experience including mood disorders (depression and anxiety), agitation/aggression, and psychosis. Agitation/
aggression and psychosis are particularly disruptive, are associated with earlier institutionalization, and pose a major
challenge to institutional management. Treatment of disorders of emotional experience has been primarily pharmacologic
(reviewed here in detail) and has relied heavily on antipsychotic medications despite the small effect sizes demonstrated
in a large number of randomized controlled trials and the prevalence of serious side effects associated with these drugs.
Recent studies suggest that treatment with pimavanserin, an antipsychotic without activity at dopamine receptors, may
represent an important advance for treatment of psychotic manifestations, even as the drug appears to pose significant risk.
Dextromethorphan/quinidine may represent an important advance in the treatment of agitation/aggression. There is also
compelling evidence that sleep disorders, which are common among patients with Alzheimer’s disease and are readily
treatable, may potentiate psychotic manifestations and agitation/aggression, but further studies are needed.
Keywords  Alzheimer’s disease · Emotional facial expression · Emotional prosody · Alexithymia · Agitation/aggression ·
Depression · Psychosis · Sleep disorders
Introduction
An emotion corresponds physiologically to a pattern of
neural activity in orbitofrontal cortex and linked limbic
structures that represents the subjective value that defines
that emotion [1]. Emotions may be elicited by salient envi‑
ronmental stimuli, e.g., the visual perception of a rose or a
mutilated body, the sound of a nearby gunshot or a Branden‑
burg concerto, a bitter or sweet taste, or a painful stimulus,
or by memories evoked by these stimuli. Patterns of neural
activity in association cortices evoked by such stimuli in turn
elicit patterns of activity in the orbitofrontal limbic system
that define the corresponding emotion. In daily life, most
often our emotions are evoked in the course of our inter‑
actions with other people, conveyed largely by their emo‑
tional facial expressions and their affective prosody. We in
turn communicate our own emotions to others via our own
facial expressions and affective prosody. The experience of
emotions through such emotional communication depends
upon the integrity of association cortices (predominantly
in the right hemispheric convexity) and the integrity of the
orbitofrontal limbic system, the substrate for emotional
experience. Emotional experience can also be affected by
endogenous dysfunction of orbitofrontal limbic systems
associated with agitation/aggression, depression, anxiety,
and psychosis.
Emotional manifestations of Alzheimer’s disease (AD)
thus can be logically divided into disorders of emotional
 *	 Stephen E. Nadeau

snadeau@ufl.edu
1
Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center, Malcom
Randall VA Medical Center, 1601 SW Archer Road,
Gainesville, FL 32608‑1197, USA
2
Research Service, Malcom Randall VA Medical Center, 1601
SW Archer Road, Gainesville, FL 32608‑1197, USA
3
The Brain Rehabilitation Research Center, Malcom Randall
VA Medical Center, 1601 SW Archer Road, Gainesville,
FL 32608‑1197, USA
4
Malcom Randall VA Medical Center and the Department
of Neurology, University of Florida College of Medicine,
Gainesville, FL, USA
/ Published online: 10 January 2022
Neurotherapeutics (2022) 19:99–116

1 3
communication and disorders of emotional experience.
Disorders of emotional communication include impaired
comprehension of affective emotional speech prosody and
emotional facial expression, impaired production of affec‑
tive emotional prosody and facial emotional expression,
and alexithymia. Disorders of emotional experience include
mood disorders such as depression and anxiety, hallucina‑
tions and delusions (psychosis), and agitation and aggres‑
sion. All these changes in emotion in patients with AD can
lead to degradation of quality of life for patients and family
members. Disorders of emotional experience tend to precipi‑
tate institutionalization and present the greatest challenges
to institutional care.
Apathy, as typically operationally defined, is often
included among neuropsychiatric features of AD. As will be
discussed, it may best be viewed as predominantly a mani‑
festation of impaired executive function.
Disorders of Emotional Communication
There are several means by which emotions can be commu‑
nicated: via facial expressions, via vocal emotional prosody,
through words, and through body postures and movements.
Comprehending Facial Emotional Expressions
During interpersonal communication, the recognition and
production of facial emotional expressions are important
means of communicating emotional experience. Har‑
grave, Maddock, and Stone [2] examined facial emotion
matching, facial emotion labeling, and same-different
emotion differentiation in patients with AD and healthy
elderly volunteers. When compared with control partici‑
pants, patients with AD were significantly impaired on
all three measures. Patients with AD were also impaired
on a facial identity matching task. When Hargrave et al.
used facial identity matching scores as a covariate, they
found that the facial emotion processing deficit may be
independent of the impairment in non-emotional face
processing. It has also been reported that patients with
AD have the greatest difficulty recognizing sad faces [3].
Lavenu and Pasquier [4] found that as AD progressed,
so did the impairment in recognizing emotional faces.
They thought that this decline could be related to the
progressive atrophy of the amygdala, the anterior tempo‑
ral cortex, and the orbital frontal cortex. However, they
provided no strong evidence to support this localiza‑
tion. Some investigators have not been able to detect an
impairment in the understanding of emotional faces in
patients with AD [5]. These disparate findings suggest
that further research is needed.
Phillips et al. [6] reported that in patients with AD,
impairments of facial emotion perception predicted quality
of life, independent of variance related to cognitive functions
and mood, suggesting the potential importance of emotion
decoding skills in the well-being of older adults.
A failure to recognize emotional faces can also be caused
by a visual attentional disorder. Bourgin et al. [7] investi‑
gated visual emotional processing in patients with AD by
measuring performance on a task requiring saccades away
from or toward emotional stimuli. Age-matched controls
exhibited a bias toward negative stimuli, making more
anti-saccade errors for negative stimuli and quicker sac‑
cades toward negative stimuli. In contrast, patients with AD
exhibited no emotion-related differences. These results sug‑
gest that there is impairment in early emotional attention in
patients with AD.
Güntekin et al. [8] performed EEG studies of patients
with AD who had impairment in comprehension of emo‑
tional facial expressions and of matched healthy control
participants. They found significant a hemispheric differ‑
ence between these two groups. There was a right hemi‑
sphere alpha power dominance in healthy subjects but not
in patients with AD.
Klein-Koerkamp et al. [9] wanted to learn whether abnor‑
malities in emotional decoding in patients with AD were
related to general cognitive decline or reflected an independ‑
ent deficit. They performed a comprehensive meta-analysis
of existing studies that compared patients with AD with
age-matched healthy older adults on measures of emotional
decoding. Their goals were to quantify the magnitude of the
AD deficit and to identify the variables that may modulate
the deficit. Their results indicated that patients with AD have
significant impairment in emotional decoding regardless of
the emotional task, the type of stimuli used, the type of emo‑
tion tested, or disease severity. Even after these investigators
controlled for cognitive status, the emotional performance
of patients with AD was still poorer than that of the healthy
controls. These results suggest that impaired emotion pro‑
cessing in these patients cannot be solely explained by the
cognitive deficit. They provide evidence that progressive
neuropathological changes associated with AD can specifi‑
cally impair emotional processing.
Producing Facial Emotional Expressions
Facial emotional expressions can be either volitional, pro‑
duced by means of the primary motor cortex via the cor‑
ticobulbar tracks, or they can be spontaneous, elicited by
patterns of neural activity in the orbitofrontal cortex and the
limbic system [1]. Intentional (voluntary) emotional facial
expressions are a highly complex and are a learned form of
human communication [10]. These intentional expressions
are often used to influence the behavior of others.
100
K. M. Heilman, S. E. Nadeau

1 3
Smith [11] examined spontaneous facial expression in
response to emotional stimuli and its relationship to subjec‑
tive experience in patients with mild dementia of the Alzhei‑
mer type and in age-matched controls. Participants viewed
a series of video clips depicting various emotions. The
participants were videotaped while watching the vignettes,
and their facial expressions were scored using the Facial
Action Coding System [12]. Participants with AD showed
more facial expression associated with negative emotion in
reaction to the sad vignettes than did controls. However,
self-ratings of emotional experiences were similar for both
groups. Correlations between emotion ratings and intensity
of facial expression were higher for healthy controls during
happy vignettes.
Mograbi, Brown, and Morris [13] studied emotional reac‑
tivity in patients with mild to moderate AD and matched
controls by using films with positive, neutral, or negative
emotional content. Reactivity was measured through a selfreport questionnaire and the filming of facial expressions
during viewing. The patients with AD showed reduced selfreported reactivity to films with negative content but exhib‑
ited facial responses that were similar to those of controls
for all films.
In summary, the limited studies on spontaneous emo‑
tional facial expression in patients with AD have yielded
conflicting results.
Comprehending Affective Prosody
Taler et al. [14] explored the emotional prosodic process‑
ing impairment associated with AD and in addition sought
to learn if this disorder also impaired grammatic prosody.
Patients with AD were impaired in comprehending both
emotional prosody and grammatic prosody (discriminat‑
ing between statements, questions, and commands). These
results suggest that impairments in affective prosody pro‑
cessing in AD may be related to a more general prosodic
processing impairment. It was also noted that the partici‑
pants with AD had mild disease, suggesting that prosodic
impairments occur early in this disease. Templier et al. [15]
also tested comprehension of emotional prosody in patients
with AD and found that these patients were impaired.
Producing Affective Prosody
Horley, Reid, and Burnham [16] investigated the expression
of emotional prosody in patients with moderate dementia
of the Alzheimer’s type, as well as control participants,
investigating expression of happiness, anger, sadness, and
surprise. In this expressive task, objective acoustic measure‑
ments revealed significantly less pitch modulation by the
Alzheimer group. However, these measurements showed
that the patients with AD retained their ability to vary pitch
level, pitch modulation, and speaking rate as a function of
emotion.
Martínez-Sánchez and co-workers [17] studied the pro‑
duction of speech prosody in patients with AD and healthy
controls by measuring variation in fundamental frequency
and amplitude of speech on a reading task. Their results
revealed that pitch variations in speech and variations in
syllable timing were reduced in the Alzheimer’s group and
that these impairments tended to produce a “flat” speech
prosody in these patients.
Alexithymia
The term alexithymia come from Greek and means “with‑
out words for emotions.” However, it is presently defined
by impaired awareness of one’s feelings, reduced ability to
explicitly identify and describe feelings, and limited dif‑
ferentiation of emotional states (see recent reviews by [1,
18]). Three scales are often used to assess patients for alex‑
ithymia: the Beth Israel Questionnaire, the Shalling Sifneos
Psychosomatic Scale, and the Toronto Alexithymia Scale.
There have been only a few studies of alexithymia in
patients with AD. Sturm and Levenson [19] reported
that alexithymia scores were positively correlated with
behavioral deficits in patients with dementia and were
negatively correlated with the grey matter volume of the
right pregenual anterior cingulate cortex. Yuruyen et al.
[20] found significantly greater alexithymia (defined by
scores on the Toronto Alexithymia Scale) in patients
with AD and patients with mild cognitive impairment.
However, they found no significant differences between
these two groups of patients. Smirni et al. [21] also
found higher total alexithymia scores in patients with
AD or MCI than in healthy participants. In contrast,
Arroyo-Aniló et al. [22] tested patients with mild AD
and a matched group of healthy control participants for
alexithymia using the Shalling Sifneos Psychosomatic
Scale and found no differences. They also did not find
any significant correlations between alexithymia scores
and cognitive variables. The reason for the different
result is not certain, but as this study used the Shalling
Sifneos Psychosomatic Scale and other studies have use
the Toronto Alexithymia Scale, it is possible that the dif‑
ference is methodologic in origin.
Treatment of Disorders of Emotional
Communication
Treatment of disorders of emotional communication in
general has recently been reviewed in detail elsewhere
101
Emotional and Neuropsychiatric Disorders Associated with Alzheimer’s Disease

1 3
[23]. We are not aware of any research on these treatments
in patients with Alzheimer’s disease.
Apathy
Apathy has been defined as a neuropsychiatric symptom
characterized by a loss of motivation, emotional reactivity,
and initiative [24]. In 2021, the International Society for
CNS Clinical Trials and Methodology (ISCTM) Apathy
Work Group [25], in its refinement of diagnostic criteria
for apathy, reached a consensus that manifestations in two
of three dimensions must be present: B1, diminished ini‑
tiative; B2, diminished interest; and B3, diminished emo‑
tional expression/responsiveness.
The word apathy derives from the Greek term for absence
of feeling. The word abulia derives from a Latin-Greek con‑
struction meaning “without will.” Apathy therefore relates to
emotions and abulia to intention, an executive function. Widely
used metrics for apathy (Apathy Evaluation Scale, Clinician
Version [AES-C]) [26], the Apathy Scale [27], the Lille Apathy
Rating Scale [LARS] [28], the Apathy-Motivation Index [29],
the Dementia Apathy Interview and Rating [DAIR] [30], and
the Neuropsychiatric Inventory Questionnaire (NPI)(1 item)
[31]) conflate the two terms. Furthermore, a quick perusal of
the items in these metrics reveals that they predominantly tap
abulia (see also [32, 33]). This was made quite explicit in the
2018 consensus criteria for apathy: “a quantitative reduction
of goal-directed activity in comparison to a patient’s previous
level of functioning” [34].
Research on apathy has faced a number of major chal‑
lenges. One has been that the large number of more funda‑
mental neural processing deficits implicated by the diag‑
nostic criteria implicates multiple neural networks, each
supporting a particular computational function. Diminished
initiative (B1) and diminished interest (B2) are classic exec‑
utive function deficits and, as such, suggest either abulia
or akinesia. Deficits in emotional reactivity during personto-person interactions (or person-to-pet interactions) could
reflect impairment in perceptual processing (impairment in
comprehension of facial expression or impairment in com‑
prehension of affective prosody), impairment in emotional
expression, or a disorder of orbitofrontal-limbic function
that attenuates (as in 9) or distorts (as in 12) perceptions or
memories potentially evocative of emotion and emotional
expression. However, apathy, in operational terms, as noted
above, is defined by the items included in 9 scales, which
largely probe executive functions supported by dorsolat‑
eral prefrontal cortex. On the other hand, imaging studies
(reviewed by 24) particularly point to pathology in the ante‑
rior cingulate cortex and medial prefrontal regions. This sug‑
gests that while apathy scale items load heavily on prefrontal
functions associated with dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, the
fundamental deficit may actually be best interpreted as a
form of akinesia, as classically seen with midline frontal
lesions [1, 35].
Apathy—absence of feeling—might best be viewed
as a disorder of the magnitude of emotional feeling. This
could be related to pathology in systems supporting emo‑
tional communication or in the orbitofrontal-limbic system.
Because orbitofrontal neurofibrillary tangles do not typi‑
cally develop until the most advanced stages of AD [36],
disorders of emotional communication are likely to be the
major factors in early and middle stages of the disease and
would best be tested using the methods described in the
forgoing. Orbitofrontal disease might best be tested using
behavioral or autonomic responses to emotion-provoking
stimulus sets such as the International Affective Pictures
System (IAPS) [37, 38]. Joshi, Jimenez, and Mendez [39]
presented pictures from the IAPS [37] to patients with
early AD and matched controls. These pictures vary in
valence (positive to negative) and their potential for elicit‑
ing arousal. These investigators measured their participants’
initial heart rate deceleration, a measure of their orient‑
ing response, and their focusing of attention. Patients with
early-onset AD had significantly larger orienting responses
than did the normal controls across all conditions. The
patients with early-onset AD, when compared to the con‑
trols, even showed orienting responses to less threatening
stimuli, including pleasant stimuli. The orienting responses
among the participants with AD significantly correlated
with anxiety scores on the NPI.
The responses of some patients to SSRIs or SNRIs may
provide a clue to the mechanisms of true apathy—absence
of feeling related to orbitofrontal-limbic pathology. In the
experience of one of us, a not particularly bright or intro‑
spective patient treated for migraine, neck pain, depression,
and insomnia returned to clinic after his dose of venlafax‑
ine had been increased and asked if it could be reduced,
explaining “I’d rather feel sad than feel nothing at all.” An
SSRI/SNRI apathy syndrome is now well-reported in the
psychiatric literature [40]. In one large study, emotional
blunting, as assessed with the Oxford Questionnaire on the
Emotional Side Effects of Antidepressants, was present in
46% of patients and was observed with SSRIs, SNRIs, and
tricyclic antidepressants [41]. Emotional blunting corre‑
lates with severity of depression but clearly has a unique,
antidepressant-associated component. Only about 50% of
patients view it negatively. The apathy syndrome appears to
be an extreme variant of antidepressant-associated emotional
blunting.
Apathy as conventionally operationally defined—
actually abulia—is very commonly observed in patients
AD. It often starts even before the cognitive decline,
102
K. M. Heilman, S. E. Nadeau

1 3
and it often progresses once this impairment becomes
manifest. In neuroimaging studies, apathy in MCI and
AD is associated with aberrant white matter integrity in
widely distributed pathways [42].
Treatment with methylphenidate has been reported to
significantly reduce abulia symptoms and improve global
cognition [43] (see also recent Cochrane systematic review
[44]). Open-label studies of cholinesterase inhibitors such
as donepezil have also showed improvements in abulia [45].
Disorders of Emotional Experience:
Agitation/Aggression, Depression,
and Psychosis
Agitation/aggression, depression, and psychosis (hallucina‑
tions or delusions) are the three most common behavioral
and psychological endophenotypes of AD; each is observed
in 30–40% of patients [46–49]. Anxiety symptoms have been
observed in up to 70% of patients with AD and are strongly
associated with other neuropsychiatric manifestations [50].
Anxiety is particularly likely to be a problem in patients who
develop AD before the age of 65 [51, 52].
Agitation/Aggression
Agitation in the context of dementia is defined as exces‑
sive motor activity and verbal or physical aggression that is
associated with observed or inferred evidence of emotional
distress; that is severe enough to produce excess disability;
that, in the physician’s opinion, is beyond that due to the
cognitive impairment; and that cannot be attributed solely
to another comorbid psychiatric or medical condition [53].
Agitated behavior is often preceded by interactions with
institutional staff members involving either speaking or
touching or by intrusion by staff members into the patient’s
own personal space, particularly in the context of bathing,
toileting, grooming, or dressing, or during redirection of the
patient. Physically aggressive behavior is often preceded
by verbal aggression, acts of non-compliance, or defiance
of requests [54]. Lower prevalence of agitation has been
associated with favorable scores on measures of physical
environment and staff treatment activities, such as general
design, space, lighting, noise, maintenance, resident rooms,
quality of the staff interaction with residents, and the pro‑
portion of residents engaged in planned activities [55] (but
see also 56). Agitation is associated with incident anxiety,
apathy (abulia), and delusions [57] but not depression [46].
Treatment-related reductions in agitation have been associ‑
ated with treatment related reductions in psychotic manifes‑
tations [58]. A number of factors can predispose to the acute
or subacute development of agitation. These include chronic
or acute pain, sleep disturbances (including sundowning),
changes in medications, acute medical illness, hospitaliza‑
tion, and delirium [59].
Agitation is often associated with more severe dementia,
more rapid progression to severe dementia, reduced qual‑
ity of life, earlier death, and worse relationships with fam‑
ily members and caregivers [56, 60]. It increases caregiver
burden [61], risk of institutionalization, and costs associated
with care of patients with AD [62].
Depression
Olin et al. [63] defined provisional diagnostic criteria for
depression in AD: clinically significant depressed mood;
decreased positive affect or pleasure in response to social
contact and usual activities; social isolation or withdrawal;
disruption of appetite; disruption of sleep; psychomotor
changes (e.g., agitation or retardation); irritability; fatigue
or loss of energy; feelings of worthlessness, hopelessness,
or excessive or inappropriate guilt; and recurrent thoughts
of death, suicidal ideation, plan, or attempt.
Most depression scales have been validated in young
participants. In contrast, the Geriatric Depression Scale
[64] and the Cornell Scale for Depression in Demen‑
tia [65] were developed for use in geriatric patients.
Patients with a cognitive impairment often fail to report
or underreport symptoms of depression because of
impairment in memory or ability to communicate, and
thus, input from caregivers is important in diagnosing
depression in patients with AD. Therefore, many clini‑
cians use the Cornell Scale because it includes input
from caregivers.
AD appears to frequently be associated with depression,
and depressive manifestations are often quite persistent [66].
Reifler et al. [67] reported that of 102 patients satisfying
DSM-III criteria for primary degenerative dementia, 26%
had depression. Cummings et al. [68] found evidence of
depressive symptoms in 17% of patients with AD; however,
no patients with severe depression were identified. A rela‑
tively recent study reported a prevalence of up to 50% [69],
and a meta-analysis of 57 studies of patients with MCI found
a 32% prevalence of depression [70]. These differences in
results may be related to differences in the diagnostic criteria
used for depression in patients with AD.
MRI structural imaging studies of patients with late life
depression and AD have demonstrated abnormalities in hip‑
pocampal volume and ventricular enlargement [71]. Some
studies have suggested that depression may be related to
degeneration of the dorsal raphe nucleus, which supplies
serotonin to the brain, as well as the locus coeruleus, which
supplies norepinephrine [72]. More severe loss of seroto‑
nin receptors and serotonin transporter binding has been
reported in patients with AD and depression, findings that
may have implications for treatment [73]. Other studies
103
Emotional and Neuropsychiatric Disorders Associated with Alzheimer’s Disease

1 3
suggest that the mechanisms may be more complex (1). In
general, older adults with late-onset depression are more
likely to have cerebrovascular disease, including white mat‑
ter hyperintensities or leukoencephalopathy, especially when
these white matter changes affect the frontal-striatal and
frontal-limbic brain networks [73]. There are other factors
that appear to be related to the development of depression in
patients with AD. These include being female, having a pre‑
vious history of depression, ApoE4 positivity, and a family
history of depression. It has been reported that depression is
less severe in the later stages of AD [74]. Some medications,
such as centrally acting beta blockers (e.g., propranolol), can
induce depression.
Zubenko et al. [75] compared depression in patients
with AD to depression in aging participants without AD.
They found that patients with AD and depression had more
difficulties with concentration and indecisiveness, fewer
sleep disturbances, and fewer reports of feelings of worth‑
lessness or excessive guilt.
Psychosis
In a retrospective study of 372 patients with autopsy-
confirmed neurodegenerative disease [76], psychosis was by
far most common in patients with Lewy body disease/AD and
frontotemporal lobar degeneration with transactive response
DNA binding protein-43 (TDP-43) inclusions. However,
psychotic manifestations were documented in 22.5% of
patients with AD, 6–41% with hallucinations (pooled preva‑
lence of 16% in clinical series [77]), and 9–59% with delu‑
sions (pooled prevalence of 31% in clinical series [77]).
Often psychotic manifestations are observed in the first
3 years of the disease. Auditory hallucinations are uncom‑
mon. Hallucinations tended to occur in association with
sleep in 61.5%.
The nature of delusions differs among the major causes
of dementia. In general, they are almost always conceivably
possible [76]. Delusions in patients with AD are most often
paranoid and infrequently are they persecutory, grandiose,
erotic, reflect jealousy, or involve misidentification of people
(Capgras syndrome) or places [76].
The precise toll taken by psychosis per se on families
and the healthcare system is not certain. However, the
additional burden posed by neuropsychiatric symptoms
and usually measured using the NPI [31]) may be sub‑
stantial. Neuropsychiatric manifestations in general and
psychotic symptoms in particular are often associated
with reduced caregiver ratings of health and quality of life
[78]. They are also associated with much greater direct
and indirect medical costs, even in patients with mild
dementia [79]. Psychotic manifestations are associated
with increased risk of cognitive and functional decline,
institutionalization, and death [60, 80].
Treatment
Primary Treatment of Disorders of Emotional
Experience
Although there is no substantially effective primary treat‑
ment for AD, there are several conditions susceptible to
treatment that may contribute to behavioral and psychologi‑
cal features of AD. These conditions include depression,
pain, and sleep disorders. Some of these conditions may be
difficult to identify in patients with severe dementia, and in
practice, they may go undetected and untreated, even as their
treatment may be fairly benign (see below).
Depression
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence sug‑
gests that, for people with mild-to-moderate dementia, psy‑
chological treatments should be tried before antidepressants
are initiated [73]. These behavioral and cognitive-behavioral
modification programs include emotion-oriented therapies,
psychotherapy, and sensory-stimulation therapies (e.g.,
music therapy, art therapy, pet therapy, aromatherapy, mul‑
tisensory approaches, and structured activity programs).
The American Psychiatric Association [81] practice
guidelines for pharmacologic treatment of patients with AD
and other dementias who are depressed suggest that selec‑
tive serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) should be the first
choice. However, this guideline is not powered by clinical
trial data, and there is a paucity of adequately powered ran‑
domized controlled trials (RCTs) to test the value of these
drugs in AD. Systematic reviews of published studies have
failed to demonstrate a treatment effect [66, 82]. Further‑
more, as with treatment studies of depression in any context,
the conduct of RCTs that capture the flexibility of antide‑
pressant treatment in clinical practice (with the opportunity
for substantial titration and use of alternative or combined
drug regimens), coupled with the magnitude of placebo
effects, presents a major challenge.
Pain
Agitation/aggression can be related to a number of factors,
including pain or discomfort related to an occult urinary
tract infection, constipation, a broken bone, or degenera‑
tive joint disease; to headache or nausea; to frustration
with inability to communicate; or it can be directly related
to dementia pathology. Pain may be difficult to ascertain in
patients with dementia, but Cohen-Mansfield and Lipson
[83] have shown that it can be assessed even in a pop‑
ulation of patients with an average MMSE of 6.3. In a
104
K. M. Heilman, S. E. Nadeau

1 3
large cohort study [84], uncontrolled pain was associated
with depression, psychotic manifestations, and disruptive
behaviors including physical or verbal behaviors directed
toward others and rejection of care.
Husebo et al. [85], in cluster randomized trial con‑
ducted at 18 nursing homes and involving 352 residents
with dementia (mean MMSE 7.5), found that a very mod‑
est stepped analgesia regimen (initiated with scheduled
acetaminophen, escalated as needed to a maximum opi‑
oid regimen of 24 mg morphine equivalent/day) reduced
scores on the Cohen-Mansfield Agitation Inventory by
a mean of 4.5 points (statistically significant at all time
points; mean effect size 0.28) (see also [86]). In a second‑
ary analysis, Husebo et al. [87] found that the greatest
effect was on verbally agitated behavior (effect size 2 rela‑
tive to placebo), followed by physically non-aggressive
behavior (pacing, trying to get to a different place, general
restlessness, inappropriate dressing or disrobing, handling
things inappropriately, and performing repetitious manner‑
isms), and aggressive behavior (hitting, kicking, pushing,
scratching, biting, grabbing, throwing things, cursing or
verbal aggression, spitting, tearing things/destroying prop‑
erty, hurting self or others, and screaming) (all differences
statistically significant).
Sleep Disorders
In a systematic review and meta-analysis of 48 studies of
patients with AD, sleep disorders were found in 14–69%
(pooled prevalence 39%) [77]. These include prolonged
latency, poorly sustained sleep, reduced sleep efficiency,
sleep disordered breathing, restless leg syndrome (RLS)/
periodic leg movements of sleep, circadian rhythm distur‑
bances (often with sundowning), and excessive daytime
sleepiness [88, 89]. Patients with mild or moderate AD
exhibit sleep fragmentation (increase in the number and
duration of awakenings) and reduced slow-wave sleep and
rapid eye movement sleep. Between 40 and 70% of patients
with AD exhibit > 5 apneas/hypopneas/hour [89], and 24%
exhibit RLS [90]. Sleep disorders, irritability/lability, and
anxiety are the three factors most strongly associated with
NPI caregiver distress scores [91].
Sleep disorders are associated with and may contrib‑
ute to behavioral and neuropsychiatric manifestations of
AD, and to the extent that they do, they may represent a
relatively easy means of treating these manifestations. A
factor analysis of 362 patients with AD utilizing the NPI
identified four endophenotypes: mood, hyperactivity,
psychosis, and executive function. Nighttime behavioral
disturbances loaded highly on psychosis, as did agita‑
tion (46). Agitation has been particularly associated with
RLS [92].
Treatment  Diurnally synchronized bright light therapy [89,
93, 94] and continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP)
have been shown to improve sleep quality, daytime sleepi‑
ness, and cognitive function [88, 89, 95]. However, provid‑
ing bright light therapy in an institutional setting is likely
to be challenging. Compliance by demented patients with
CPAP may be low.
RLS is readily treatable with dopaminergic drugs (levo‑
dopa/carbidopa continuous release, pramipexole, or ropin‑
irole) or with alpha-2-delta voltage-gated calcium channel
receptor blockers (gabapentin, pregabalin) in titrated dosage.
Trazodone, in doses ranging between 25 and 600 mg,
has been tested in over 45 RCTs for its value in treating
insomnia (primary, secondary, in the context of depres‑
sion, and in patients with alcohol dependence) [96]. In all
but two of these studies, it was judged to be highly effec‑
tive and associated with minimal to no side effects beyond
morning sedation in some individuals. Only one RCT of a
fixed dose of 50 mg for treatment of insomnia in patients
with AD (community dwelling) has been reported [97].
Results were comparable to those in other populations, and
there was no excess of adverse effects relative to placebo.
Dose response to trazodone is highly variable, and titration
is essential.
In a 4-week placebo controlled RCT of suvorexant
10–20 mg (titrated) involving 285 participants with mild to
moderate AD and insomnia, the drug was associated with a
modest increase in sleep duration (28 min, as measured by
polysomnography), mainly during latter parts of the night,
and no side effects except somnolence insufficient in degree
to lead to discontinuation of the drug [98].
In summary, sleep disorders are generally readily treat‑
able with pharmacologic approaches using drugs with mini‑
mal side effects. To the extent that sleep disorders potentiate
agitation/aggressiveness and psychosis (an under-studied
subject), treatment of these disorders may be of substantial
benefit for behavioral and psychological manifestations of
AD.
Symptomatic Treatment of Disorders of Emotional
Experience
When factors that might be contributing to behavioral and
psychological disorders of patients with AD cannot be
identified or treated, symptomatic treatments are employed.
Although current symptomatic treatments for neuropsychi‑
atric disorders associated with AD have contributed to our
ability to manage patients with this disease, the effectiveness
of all drugs currently in use is, on average, modest and often
insufficient, and many drugs, particularly the antipsychot‑
ics, carry with them substantial risk of serious side effects.
A number of trials of new agents, some quite novel, are in
progress [99].
105
Emotional and Neuropsychiatric Disorders Associated with Alzheimer’s Disease

1 3
Anticonvulsants
Several adequately sized RCTs of carbamazepine and val‑
proate suggest that these drugs do not have clinically signifi‑
cant effects on behavioral and psychological symptoms of
dementia, most particularly agitation, and that they are often
associated with adverse effects [100, 101]. However, one
RCT of carbamazepine in 51 severely demented institution‑
alized patients [102] did report a significant benefit of the
drug on the primary outcome measure, the Brief Psychiatric
Rating Scale (BPRS), as well as several secondary meas‑
ures, including a factor loading on agitation derived from
a principal component analysis of the BPRS and tabulation
of extra staff time required for care of the patient. There do
not appear to have been any RCTs of pregabalin, gabapentin,
lamotrigine, or topiramate.
Acetylcholinesterase Inhibitors
Many studies have evaluated the impact of acetylcholinest‑
erase inhibitors (donepezil, rivastigmine, and galantamine)
on neuropsychiatric symptoms of AD [103] and have dem‑
onstrated significant but modest reductions in symptoms
including delusions, agitation, depression, anxiety, apathy,
disinhibition, and irritability. However, in a meta-analysis
of 12 RCTs, Campbell et al. [104] found a weighted mean
decline in NPI score of 1.38 points and a drug effect size
of only 0.10. Other studies suggest that these results may
reflect either the mildness of neuropsychiatric symptoms in
participants typically recruited to trials of efficacy defined
by measures of cognitive function [105] or heterogeneity
in response to acetylcholinesterase inhibitors. In a rand‑
omized withdrawal study of donepezil administered to 96
participants with elevated NPI scores, Holmes et al. [106]
reported a decline in NPI score of 2.9 points in those still
on donepezil and an increase of 3.3 points in those on pla‑
cebo 12 weeks after randomization. Mega et al. [107], in an
open label trial of donepezil, found that 41% of participants
(responders) demonstrated a ≥ 4-point decrease in NPI score,
whereas 28% (non-responders) demonstrated a ≥ 4-point
increase in NPI score. At baseline, responders had signifi‑
cantly worse delusions, agitation, depression, anxiety, and
disinhibition (see also Cummings et al. [108]).
Antidepressants
The use of antidepressants to treat depression in the con‑
text of AD was discussed above. We here consider other
applications.
An RCT of citalopram 30 mg/day in 186 patients with
AD with clinically consequential agitation demonstrated
clinically significant reduction in agitation as defined by
the two primary outcome measures, the Neurobehavioral
Rating Scale-Agitation Subscale (NBRS-A) and the Clini‑
cal Global Impression of Change (GCIC), as well as the
Cohen-Mansfield Agitation Inventory (CMAI) [109]. The
citalopram-treated group experienced a significantly greater
decline in NBRS-A score (p = 0.04; effect size 0.29), CMAI
(p = 0.008; effect size 0.36), and a significantly better GCIC
score (p = 0.007). Major depressive disorder was an exclu‑
sionary criterion for this study but depression is common
and may be particularly difficult to diagnose in patients with
dementia. Citalopram treatment was associated with 1 point
worsening in MMSE scores, prolongation of QT-interval,
and an increase in fall risk. A secondary analysis of trial
results revealed that citalopram treatment was also associ‑
ated with reductions in delusions, hallucinations, anxiety,
and irritability [110]. A recent RCT of mirtazapine, titrated
to 45 mg, in 204 participants failed to demonstrate any ben‑
efit [111].
There is no logical reason to think that effects similar to
those achieved with citalopram might not be achieved with
other SSRIs, SNRIs, or bupropion, given the general com‑
parability of the effects of these drugs. However, empirical
evidence is lacking.
Antipsychotics
Because of the prevalent use of antipsychotic medications
for treatment of behavioral and psychological symptoms in
AD, notwithstanding their serious side effect profile, we
review this literature in somewhat more detail. A summary
of results of RCTs of antipsychotic medications used to treat
psychosis is reported in Table 1. Results of RCTs of trials
targeting agitation are summarized in Table 2.
Adverse Effects of Symptomatic Treatment  Even the newer,
atypical antipsychotic drugs, which have largely replaced
first generation drugs in clinical practice, are associated with
a host of adverse effects, many serious [112] — hence FDA
“black box” warnings. These include worsening of cogni‑
tion [113], Parkinsonian manifestations, gait disturbances,
drowsiness, and tardive dyskinesia; venous thromboembolic
events (doubling of risk); peripheral edema; urinary tract
infections; QT interval prolongation, torsade de pointes, and
sudden cardiac death; metabolic syndrome; stroke (doubling
of risk) [112]; and death (odds ratio 1.9–2.19) [114]. Mor‑
tality risk is highest in the first 6 months of use, it is dose
related, and there is little difference in relative risk between
atypical and typical antipsychotics [114].
Summary of  Treatment Effects  A vast effort has been
devoted to RCTs of antipsychotic agents for treatment of
neuropsychiatric manifestations of AD. Unfortunately,
they have been shown to yield modest benefits (small
106
K. M. Heilman, S. E. Nadeau

1 3
Table 1   Randomized controlled trials of antipsychotic drug treatment for psychotic manifestations in Alzheimer’s disease
NPI Neuropsychiatric Inventory; NPI-NH Neuropsychiatric Inventory-Nursing Home; CGI-S Clinical Global Impression-Severity of Illness; ES effect size (values provided when published data
adequate)
* Global Clinical Impression of Change (lower is better)
† Behavioral pathology in Alzheimer’s disease – psychosis subscale
‡ Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale – psychosis factor score
¶ Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale – total
NPI/NPI-NH psychosis subscale
change score (unless otherwise
specified)
CGI-S
Author
Patient Type
N
Drug
Placebo
p
ES
Drug
Placebo
p
ES
Aripiprazole
De Deyn et al. [148] 10 mg/day
Outpatient
208
 − 6.55
 − 5.52
.17
-
 − 0.69
 − 0.54
.345
-
Mintzer et al. [149] 10 mg/day
Institutionalized
487
 − 6.87
 − 5.13
.013
-
 − 0.72
 − 0.46
.031
-
Streim et al. [150] 10 mg/day
Institutionalized
256
 − 4.53
 − 4.62
.883
.02
 − 0.57
 − 0.43
.198
.22
Olanzapine
De Deyn et al. [151] 7.5 mg/day
Institutionalized
257
 − 6.2
 − 5.0
NS
.24
3.0*
3.2*
NS
.22
Debert et al. [152] 2.5–10 mg/day flexible
Outpatient
284
 − 4.0
 − 4.7
NS
.16
0.0
0.0
NS
0
Street et al. [153] 5 mg/day
Institutionalized
100
 − 3.6
 − 1.6
.001
.29
-
-
-
-
10 mg/day
94
 − 2.2
 − 1.6
0.04
.09
-
-
-
-
15 mg/day
96
 − 1.9
 − 1.6
0.24
.04
-
-
-
-
Sultzer et al. [154] Adjusted dose: mean 5.5 mg/day
Outpatient and adult living facility
238
 − 0.3‡
 − 0.2‡
.199
.067
3.9*
4.2*
.057
-
Pimavanserin
Ballard et al. [117] 34 mg/day
Institutionalized
178
 − 3.76
 − 1.93
.04
.35
-
-
NS
-
Quetiapine
Sultzer et al. [154] Adjusted dose, mean 56.5 mg/day
Outpatient and adult living facility
233
 − 0.4‡
 − 0.2‡
.352
.137
3.8*
4.2*
.031
-
Tariot et al. [155] 100 mg/day
Institutionalized
179
 − 9.06¶
 − 6.74¶
NS
.23
-0.60
-0.47
NS
.18
Zhong et al. [156] 100 mg/day
Institutionalized
216
 − 1.8
 − 2.5
NS
.14
3.2*
3.6*
NS
-
Zhong et al. [156] 200 mg/day
Institutionalized
209
 − 2.5
 − 2.5
NS
0
3.0*
3.6*
.017
-
Risperidone
Brodaty et al. [157] adjusted: .5–2 mg/day, mean = 0.95 mg
Institutionalized
301
 − 2.0†
 − 0.7†
.004
-
-
-
-
-
Debert et al. [152] 0.5–2 mg/day flexible
Outpatient
281
 − 4.2
 − 4.7
NS
.12
0.1
0.0
NS
.125
Katz et al. [158] 0.5 mg/day
Institutionalized
307
 − 2.2†
 − 1.9†
.316
-
-
-
-
-
1 mg/day
309
 − 2.6†
 − 1.9†
.054
-
 − 0.9
 − 0.5
.002
-
2 mg/day
323
 − 3.2†
 − 1.9†
.002
-
 − 1.0
 − 0.5
 < .001
-
Mintzer et al. [159] adjusted 0.5–1.5 mg/day; mean 1.03 mg
Institutionalized
416
 − 2.9†
 − 2.3†
.118
.13
-
-
-
-
Sultzer et al. [154] adjusted dose: mean 1.0 mg/day
Outpatient and adult living facility
223
 − 0.7‡
 − 0.2‡
.010
.32
3.5*
4.2*
 < .001
-
107
Emotional and Neuropsychiatric Disorders Associated with Alzheimer’s Disease

1 3
Table 2   Randomized controlled trials of antipsychotic drug treatment for agitation/aggression in Alzheimer’s disease
CGI-S Clinical Global Impression-Severity of Illness
* CMAI Cohen-Mansfield Agitation Inventory
** CMAI = Cohen-Mansfield Agitation Inventory – total aggression subscale
† Neuropsychiatric Inventory/NPI-NH – agitation/aggression
‡ Behavioral pathology in Alzheimer’s disease – aggressiveness subscale
¶ Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale – agitation factor score
§ Global Clinical Impression of Change (lower is better)
Various (see footnote)
CGI-S
Author
Patient type
N
Drug
Placebo
p
ES
Drug
Placebo p
ES
Brexpiprazole
Grossberg et al. [160] 2 mg/day
Institutionalized
276  − 21.6*
 − 17.8*
.040
.22  − 1.27  − 1.11
NS
.23
Olanzapine
Debert et al. [152] 2.5–10 mg/day flexible
Outpatient
298  − 1.3*
 − 0.9*
NS
-
0.0
0.0
NS
-
Street et al. [153] 5 mg/day
Institutionalized
206  − 4.1†
 − 2.1†
.01
-
-
-
-
-
10 mg/day
 − 3.9†
 − 2.1†
.02
-
-
-
-
-
15 mg/day
 − 3.1†
 − 2.1†
NS
-
-
-
-
-
Sultzer et al. [154] adjusted dose: mean 5.5 mg/day
Outpatient and adult living facility
238  − 0.4¶
 − 0.1¶
.021
.26 3.9§
4.2§
.057
-
Pimavanserin
Ballard et al. [117] 34 mg/day
Institutionalized
178  − 1.13†
 − 0.47†
.25
-
-
-
NS
-
Ballard et al. [58]—post hoc analysis
34 mg/day
Institutionalized:
patients in RCT: > (N = 44)
vs < (N = 43) 50% decrease in
psychotic symptoms
44
 − 2.85†
(> 50% decrease)
0.79†
(< 50% decrease)
.0001
-
-
-
-
-
Quetiapine
Ballard et al. [161]100 mg/day
Institutionalized
56
 − 4.0*
 − 6.2*
.30
.13 -
-
-
-
Sultzer et al. [154] Adjusted dose: mean 56.5 mg/day
Outpatient and adult living facility
233  − 0.3¶
 − 0.1¶
.078
.18 3.8§
4.2§
.031
-
Tariot et al. [155] 100 mg/day
Institutionalized
179  − 2.63†
 − 1.49†
NS
.27  − 0.60  − 0.47
NS
.18
Zhong et al. [156] 100 mg/day
Institutionalized
216  − 0.9†
 − 1.2†
NS
.10 3.2*
3.6*
NS
-
Zhong et al. [156] 200 mg/day
Institutionalized
209  − 1.1†
 − 1.2†
NS
.03 3.0*
3.6*
.017
-
Risperidone
Brodaty et al. [157] adjusted: .5–2 mg/day, mean = 0.95 mg Institutionalized
301  − 7.5**
 − 3.1**
 < .001
-
-
-
-
-
De Deyn et al. [162] adjusted 0.5–2 mg/day; mean 1.1 mg
Institutionalized
229  − 3.9*
 − 1.6*
.01
-
 − 0.7
 − 0.4
.05
-
Debert et al. [152] adjusted: 0.5–2 mg/d
Outpatient
281  − 1.5*
 − 0.9*
NS
.14 0.1
0.0
NS
.125
Katz et al. [158] 0.5 mg/day
Institutionalized
307  − 1.9‡
 − 1.2‡
.02
-
-
-
-
-
1 mg/day
309  − 2.2‡
 − 1.2‡
.006
-
 − 0.9
 − 0.5
.002
-
2 mg/day
323  − 3.0‡
 − 1.2‡
 < 0.001 -
 − 1.0
 − 0.5
 < .001 -
Sultzer et al. [154] adjusted dose: mean 1.0 mg/day
Outpatient and adult living facility
233  − 0.2¶
 − 0.1¶
.082
.08 3.5§
4.2§
 < .001 -
108
K. M. Heilman, S. E. Nadeau

1 3
effect sizes) (Tables  1 and 2) and at the cost of onerous
side effects, including an associated doubling of mortal‑
ity (see also meta-analysis [115]). The advice proffered by
Schneider et al. [116] 15 years ago still seems apropos: “if
improvement is not seen [in 10 or 12 weeks] then the medi‑
cation should be discontinued and other approaches…could
be considered.” Treatment in practice would undoubtedly
benefit from the use of N of 1 trials in which a drug is insti‑
tuted for 1 to 4 months, then discontinued for the same time
period, and then re-instituted, thereby testing the value of a
drug in an individual patient.
Pimavanserin, a 5-HT2A receptor inverse agonist and
antagonist with little affinity for dopamine receptors, might
prove to be a genuine innovation [117] (see also [118]).
Its effect size (0.35, i.e., an average of 0.35 SD reduction
in symptoms), though modest, compares favorably with
that of traditional antipsychotics. The effect size was 0.73
in patients with more severe psychotic symptoms [117].
Patients treated with pimavanserin do not experience the
clinical manifestations associated with dopamine D2 recep‑
tor blockers. However, a recent retrospective cohort study of
20,298 patients with Parkinson’s disease residing in Medi‑
care long-term care facilities (2186 of whom received pima‑
vanserin), employing Medicare claims data and propensity
score-based inverse probability of treatment weighting (24
baseline characteristics), revealed a 1-year absolute mortal‑
ity rate of 38.5/100 person-years in the untreated group and
a relative risk of death in pimavanserin users of 1.56 (95%
CI 1.42–1.72) [119]. In retrospective studies, association can
never be construed with absolute confidence as evidence
of causation, and the reasons for prescribing pimavanserin
could have predisposed its users to earlier death. Further‑
more, patients with AD might not be susceptible to the risk
observed in patients with Parkinson’s disease. Nevertheless,
this was an exceptionally well-controlled study, and the
excess mortality associated with pimavanserin use (19/100
patient-years) was substantial.
The American Geriatrics Society has recommended
avoidance of antipsychotics unless non-pharmacological
options have failed or are not possible and the patient is
threatening substantial harm to self or others [120]. Never‑
theless 12–37.5% of patients with behavioral and psycho‑
logical symptoms of dementia are treated with these drugs
[121]. One can well ask why the use of these drugs continues
to be so widespread. There are several possible answers:
•	 The enormous clinical challenge posed by psychosis and
agitation and the paucity of options for meeting it.
•	 The absence of theoretically motivated and empirically
tested alternatives favors perpetuation of old practices.
•	 The apparent similarity of psychotic manifestations of
dementia and schizophrenia, coupled with the success
of antipsychotic medications in 14 of schizophrenia, pro‑
vides a strong theoretical appeal for their use in demen‑
tia.
•	 Human susceptibility to the effects of irregular reinforce‑
ment leads to generalization of favorable results in single
patients to entire clinical populations.
•	 To the extent that psychotic manifestations and agitation
wax and wane (a common observation [122, 123]), cli‑
nicians are most likely to prescribe medications during
periods of maximal symptoms; improvement thereafter
may reflect regression to the mean rather than drug effect,
the conflation of which tends to convince clinicians of
drug efficacy.
•	 The general absence in the practice of medicine of use
of N of 1 trials — an effective means for testing efficacy
in a given patient.
Benzodiazepines
Benzodiazepines would seem to be logical candidates for
treatment of certain neuropsychiatric manifestations of
dementia, for example, agitation or psychotic manifestations
occurring at night in patients with insomnia or, during the
day, in patients with high anxiety. However, research on this
subject has been at a standstill for over 20 years. The use in
elderly patients of benzodiazepines and other drugs acting
on the central nervous system has long been guided by the
Beers criteria, which were most recently updated in 2003
[124]. The Beers criteria are based on an expert consen‑
sus developed through an extensive literature review with
a bibliography and questionnaire evaluated by nationally
recognized experts in geriatric care, clinical pharmacology,
and psychopharmacology using a modified Delphi technique
to reach consensus. Our impression is that the Beers cri‑
teria have been widely taken as an absolute contraindica‑
tion to use of any dose of a benzodiazepine in the elderly.
However, the specific recommendation of the 2003 updated
version of the Beers criteria on benzodiazepines is the fol‑
lowing: potentially inappropriate use, “short-acting benzo‑
diazepines: doses greater than lorazepam, 3 mg; oxazepam,
60 mg; alprazolam, 2 mg; temazepam, 15 mg; and triazolam,
0.25 mg”, and concern, “Because of increased sensitivity
to benzodiazepines in elderly patients, smaller doses may
be effective as well as safer. Total daily doses should rarely
exceed the suggested maximums” [124]. Even now, 18 years
later, we find little to disagree with. Nevertheless, we felt
it worth reconsidering this literature, if for no other reason
than to emphasize the need for further studies.
Most of the case against benzodiazepines derives from
cohort or case–control studies [125]. In such studies, patients
in the drug group are assumed to differ from those in the con‑
trol group only in that they are taking the drug. Quite obvi‑
ously, patients in the drug group differ in another important
109
Emotional and Neuropsychiatric Disorders Associated with Alzheimer’s Disease

1 3
respect: they suffered symptoms that led physicians to pre‑
scribe the drug, symptoms that might be having a major
detrimental impact on the patient’s life and that might be
associated with intrinsic hazard, as well as additional comor‑
bidities. Cohort studies can only establish statistical associa‑
tion, but all too often, causality is inferred. For example, it
is often assumed that benzodiazepines cause worsening of
cognitive function or more rapid cognitive decline when it
is actually the case that they were prescribed because such
patients are more likely to experience symptoms that might
lead physicians to prescribe benzodiazepines. It is unlikely
that prescribing rationale can be adequately captured in ret‑
rospective studies by using propensity score matching. By
the very nature of cohort studies, risk is reported as relative
risk. A relative risk of 3 might sound impressive until one
is told that the baseline risk of the adverse effect in question
is 0.01%/year. Clinical decision making is based upon the
weighing of absolute likelihood of benefit against absolute
risk of harm. It might be perfectly appropriate to incur a
certain risk of harm to achieve an important benefit (as we
do, e.g., in the use of antipsychotic medications and in the
use of anticoagulants to mitigate stroke risk in patients with
atrial fibrillation). Many studies seem to assume that the risk
is homogeneous, experienced equally by all patients treated
with the drug. The possibility that risk is predominantly
associated with excessive dosing is seldom considered.
Any drug acting on the central nervous system, particularly
when prescribed in excessive dosage, might have deleterious
effects on cognition, the more so in patients with already
compromised cognitive function. Absolute dosage may be a
poor guide because optimal dosage, probably influenced in
part by genetics, likely varies substantially between differ‑
ent patients. The possibility that certain side effects may be
associated predominantly with certain risk factors, e.g., loss
of postural reflexes, or idiosyncratic in nature (likely also
because of genetic variants), is seldom considered. When
guidelines proscribe the use of certain drugs, the absence
of suitable alternatives is seldom considered. Finally, many
patients with insomnia, left to their own devices, will resort
to use of over-the-counter hypnotics, which almost univer‑
sally contain diphenhydramine, a drug with potent anticho‑
linergic effects, which may impair cognition.
The origins of the concept of high risk of dependency are
not so clear [126]. The most likely explanation appears to
be conflation of persistent disorder symptoms with depend‑
ency symptoms. Although benzodiazepines have generally
been FDA approved on the basis of data from short trials
(which are less expensive to perform), they are commonly
used to treat chronic conditions. If a benzodiazepine is initi‑
ated for treatment of generalized anxiety disorder and symp‑
toms recur 10 years later when the drug is discontinued,
this likely constitutes evidence that the original condition
persists, rather than that the patient has become dependent
on the drug. Symptoms of over-rapid reduction in dosage/
sudden termination might also be interpreted as evidence of
psychological dependence when they actually reflect physi‑
cal dependence and can easily be avoided.
Well-designed RCTs can address many, albeit not all, of
the problems that plague cohort and case–control studies.
RCTs of benzodiazepines for neuropsychiatric manifesta‑
tions of dementia were conducted decades ago [125]. None
would remotely meet today’s standards: they were vastly
underpowered, there was inadequate attention to dose titra‑
tion, and experimental control was lacking. Testing the
effects of drugs that require titration constitutes a particular
challenge for RCT design. It is by no means certain that the
risk/benefit ratio of benzodiazepines when used in patients
with AD will justify their risks, but given the data bearing
on antipsychotics discussed in the foregoing, the pursuit of
further RCTs would seem to be warranted.
The possibility that the use of benzodiazepines might
increase the risk of developing dementia has been raised
by a number of studies [127, 128]. Because most of these
studies have involved retrospective cohort designs, they are
susceptible to the same methodologic weaknesses as studies
reporting the clinical adverse effects were associated with
benzodiazepine use, as discussed above. Only prospective
studies (and preferably RCTs) can definitively determine
whether a cause-effect relationship exists. Prospective cohort
studies have not shown an association between short-acting
benzodiazepine use and incident dementia [129, 130].
Cannabinoids
A recent systematic review [131] and a meta-analysis [132]
of nine small clinical trials of cannabinoids (tetrahydro‑
cannabinol, dronabinol, and nabilone; six RCTs and three
quasi-randomized trials) in the treatment of behavioral and
psychological symptoms of dementia, primarily agitation
and aggression, suggested a sufficient possibility of benefit
to motivate the conduct of larger trials. A number of RCTs
are in progress [133].
Dextromethorphan + quinidine
Dextromethorphan is a low-affinity, uncompetitive
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist, σ1 receptor
agonist, serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor,
and neuronal nicotinic α3β4 receptor antagonist. The com‑
bination with low-dose quinidine inhibits the metabolism
of dextromethorphan, thereby achieving higher central
nervous system concentrations of the drug. The combina‑
tion has been approved by the Food and Drug Administra‑
tion for the treatment of pseudobulbar affect. In an RCT
of 218 patients with AD, treatment with dextromethorphan
30 mg + quinidine 10 mg twice daily reduced scores on the
110
K. M. Heilman, S. E. Nadeau

1 3
NPI agitation/aggression domain by 1.5 points relative to
placebo (p < 0.001; effect size 0.60) [134]. The mean Clini‑
cal Global Impression of Change was 3.0 in the drug group
and 3.6 in the placebo group (p < 0.01; lower is better).
Major adverse effects included falls (8.6% versus 3.9%),
diarrhea (5.9% versus 3.1%), and urinary tract infections
(5.3 versus 3.9%).
Memantine
A number of RCTs have shown that memantine has a statisti‑
cally and clinically significant beneficial effect in reducing
scores on the NPI symptom cluster of agitation/aggression,
delusions, hallucinations, and irritability/lability in patients
with moderate to severe AD [135, 136]. However, more
recent RCTs have failed to show any benefit for agitation/
aggression [137, 138].
Propranolol
There has been a single small trial of propranolol [139].
Thirty-one patients with persistent disruptive behaviors (NPI
domains: agitation/aggression, irritability/lability, and/or
aberrant motor behavior) were titrated to a mean dose of
propranolol 106 mg/day or placebo, maintained for 6 weeks.
The drug group experienced a mean decrease in total NPI
score that was 7.5 points greater than in the placebo group
(p < 0.01; effect size 0.49). Clinical Global Impression of
Change was 3 in the drug group and 4.5 in the placebo
group (p < 0.005; lower is better). Although there was a high
drop-out rate in the placebo group and the small number
of patients in this trial limits generalizability, the medium
effect size that was achieved suggests that further trials are
warranted.
Non‑pharmacologic Interventions
An RCT of various combinations of antipsychotic drug
review, a very modest social intervention program, and a
very modest exercise program [140], conducted in patients
with dementia in 16 nursing homes, demonstrated that antip‑
sychotic drug review reduced the use of these drugs by 50%,
and the combination of antipsychotic drug review and the
social interaction program reduced mortality from 35 to
19%. Antipsychotic drug review worsened neuropsychiatric
symptoms (NPI score), but this effect was rendered negligi‑
ble when this review was combined with the social interven‑
tion. Exercise significantly improved neuropsychiatric symp‑
toms overall but not depression. The modest nature of the
interventions employed in this study means that they would
likely be feasible in most institutional settings. In an older
study, Fossey [141] demonstrated, in a cluster randomized
trial of a psychosocial intervention combined with efforts
to reduce neuroleptic use conducted in 12 nursing homes,
that neuroleptic use could be reduced by 19% without any
associated increase in agitation and aggression.
There have been a large number of studies of interven‑
tions to ameliorate agitation [142] (see also [143] for com‑
prensive review). Some have demonstrated very large effect
sizes (> 2), particularly those that involve various methods
of training institutional staff. However, results have varied
enormously from trial to trial, suggesting that specific attrib‑
utes of a particular intervention pursued in a particular trial
are very important. These also tend to be more intensive and
therefore more costly interventions.
Studies testing the effect of non-pharmacological
approaches on activities of daily living and depression in
patients with moderate to severe dementia have reported
effects sizes in the small (ADL 0.28) to medium range
(depression 0.44) [144] but no impact on other behavioral
and psychological symptoms, including anxiety.
Finally, a comprehensive management guideline,
“Describe, Investigate, Create, and Evaluate” (DICE), has
been formulated by a multidisciplinary panel of experts
[145, 146] for management of behavioral and psychologi‑
cal symptoms of AD. The approach was recommended in a
recent international consensus evaluation that employed a
modified Delphi approach [147]. Insofar as we can deter‑
mine, DICE has not been subject to empirical testing.
Conclusion
There is now strong evidence that patients with AD have lost
their ability to comprehend and express affective prosody,
impaired ability to comprehend emotional facial expres‑
sions and affective body gestures, and impaired ability to
express affect by these same means. These symptoms are
typically not particularly disruptive, but they are associ‑
ated with impoverishment of the emotional life of affected
patients and degradation of close emotional relationships.
Patients with AD also experience disorders of emotional
experience, mood (including depression and anxiety), agi‑
tation/belligerence, and psychosis. These disorders reduce
quality of life and are often very disruptive to families. They
are frequently the precipitant of institutionalization. Some
disorders, particularly agitation/belligerence, which become
more severe with advancing disease, pose major challenges
to institutional management of patients with AD.
Research on primary treatment of disorders of emotional
communication is in earliest stages, and so far, no treatment
has demonstrated sufficient efficacy to justify translation to
clinical practice [1]. The mechanisms underlying disorders
of emotional experience are generally too poorly understood
to enable the development of a primary treatment. However,
the treatment of depression, pain, and sleep disorders may
111
Emotional and Neuropsychiatric Disorders Associated with Alzheimer’s Disease

1 3
have substantial benefits on daytime quality of life. Treatment
of sleep disorders, using CPAP for obstructive sleep apnea,
dopaminergic treatment or gabapentin/pregabalin for RLS/
periodic leg movements of sleep, or trazodone in titrated dos‑
age for idiopathic insomnia, shows the greatest promise for
management of the most disruptive manifestations, agitation/
belligerence, and psychosis; unfortunately, there have not been
sufficient studies in this area. Treatment of depression in AD
reflects inference from success in the use of SSRIs and SNRIs
for treatment of idiopathic depression as there have been no
sufficiently powered and adequately designed RCTs to prove
their benefit in patients with AD who have depression.
A single, quite impressive study of a non-pharmacologic
treatment of psychosis in patients institutionalized for AD
has shown a clinically important benefit [140]. However,
the general approach to psychosis and agitation/aggres‑
sion in this population has been overwhelmingly pharma‑
cologic, predominantly relying on antipsychotic medica‑
tions, notwithstanding the small effect sizes demonstrated
in the very large number of adequately powered RCTs
and their potentially serious side effects. These data sug‑
gest that antipsychotic medications should be used only
as a last resort and then only for limited periods of time
because psychosis and agitation/aggression tend to wax
and wane. Newer approaches, for example, using pima‑
vanserin, a 5-HT2A receptor inverse agonist and antagonist
with little affinity for dopamine receptors, for psychosis,
and dextromethorphan + quinidine for agitation/aggression,
show considerable promise, but data are not yet adequate
to support on-label use of these drugs for these indications.
Unfortunately, the substantial excess mortality associated
with pimavanserin use in patients with Parkinson’s disease
strikes a strong cautionary note. Physicians are perfectly
free to prescribe these drugs off-label, but this prescription
will likely be strongly resisted by insurance companies.
Supplementary Information  The online version contains supplemen‑
tary material available at https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s13311-​021-​01172-w.
Acknowledgements  This work was supported by resources provided by
the North Florida/South Georgia Veterans Health System, Gainesville,
FL. It was not supported by a specific grant from funding agencies in
the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. The contents of this
manuscript do not represent the views of the US Department of Veterans
Affairs, the US Government, or the University of Florida.
Required Author Forms  34 provided by the authors are available with
the online version of this article.
References
	 1.	 Nadeau SE. Neural mechanisms of emotions, alexithymia,
and depression. Handbook of Clinical Neurology: Disorders
of Emotion in Neurologic Disease. 2021;183:299–314.
	 2.	 Hargrave R, Maddock RJ, Stone V. Impaired recognition of
facial expressions of emotion in Alzheimer’s disease. J Psy‑
chiatry Clin Neurosci. 2002;14(1):64–71.
	 3.	 McLellan T, Johnston L, Dalrymple-Alford J, Porter R. The rec‑
ognition of facial expressions of emotions in Alzheimer’s disease:
a review of findings. Acta Neuropsychiatr. 2008;20(5):236–50.
	 4.	 Lavenu I, Pasquier F. Perception of emotion on faces in fron‑
totemporal dementia and Alzheimer’s disease: a longitudinal
study. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2005;19(1):37–41.
	 5.	 Bucks RS, Radford SA. Emotion processing in Alzheimer’s
disease. Aging Ment Health. 2004;8(3):222–32.
	 6.	 Phillips LH, Scott C, Henry JD, Mowat D, Bell JS. Emotion
perception in Alzheimer’s disease and mood disorder in old
age. Psychol Aging. 2010;25(1):38–47.
	 7.	 Bourgin J, Guyader N, Chauvin A, Juphard A, Sauvée M,
Moreaud O, et al. Early emotional attention is impacted in
Alzheimer’s disease: an eye-tracking study. J Alzheimers Dis.
2018;63(4):1445–58.
	 8.	 Güntekin B, Hanoğlu L, Aktürk T, Fide E, Emek-Savaş Dd,
Ruşen E, et al. Impairments in recognition of emotional facial
expressions in Alzheimer’s disease is represented by EEG theta
and alpha responses. Psychophysiology. 2019;56(1):e13434.
	 9.	 Klein-Koerkamp Y, Beaudoin M, Baciu M, Hot P. Emotional
decoding abilities in Alzheimer’s disease: a meta-analysis.
JAlzheimers Dis. 2012;32(1):109–25.
	 10.	 Niedenthal PM, Brauer M. Social functionality of human emo‑
tion. Annu Rev Psychol. 2012;63:259–85.
	 11.	 Smith MC. Facial expression in mild dementia of the Alzhei‑
mer type. Behav Neurol. 1995;8(3–4):149–56.
	 12.	 Ekman P, Friesen W. Facial action coding system: a technique
for the measurement of facial movement. Palo Alto, California:
Consulting Psychologists Press; 1978.
	 13.	 Mograbi DC, Brown RG, Morris RG. Emotional reactivity to
film material in Alzheimer’s disease. Dement Geriatr Cogn
Disord. 2012;34(5–6):351–9.
	 14.	 Taler V, Baum SR, Chertkow H, Saumier D. Comprehension of
grammatical and emotional prosody is impaired in Alzheimer’s
disease. Neuropsychology. 2008;22(2):188–95.
	 15.	 Templier L, Chetouani M, Plaza M, Belot Z, Bocquet P, Chaby
L. Altered identification with relative preservation of emo‑
tional prosody production in patients with Alzheimer’s disease.
Geriatrie at psychologie neuropsychiatrie du vieillissement.
2015;13(1):106–15.
	 16.	 Horley K, Reid A, Burnham D. Emotional prosody perception
and production in dementia of the Alzheimer’s type. J Speech
Lang Hear Res. 2010;53(5):1132–46.
	 17.	 Martínez-Sánchez F, Garcia Meilán JJ, Pérez E, Carro J, Arana
JM. Expressive prosodic patterns in individuals with Alzhei‑
mer’s disease. Psicothema. 2012;24(1):16–21.
	 18.	 Hogeveen J, Grafman J. Alexithymia. Handb Clin Neurol.
2021;183:47–62.
	 19.	 Sturm VE, Levenson RW. Alexithymia in neurodegenerative
disease. Neurocase. 2011;17(3):242–50.
	 20.	 Yuruyen M, Akcan FE, Batun GC, Gultekin G, Toprak M,
Yavuzer H, et al. Alexithymia in people with subjective cogni‑
tive decline, mild cognitive impairment, and mild Alzheimer’s
disease. Aging Clin Exp Res. 2017;29(6):1105–11.
	 21.	 Smirni D, Beadle JN, Paradiso S. An initial study of alexithy‑
mia and its relationship with cognitive abilities among mild
cognitive impairment, mild Alzheimer’s disease, and healthy
volunteers. J Nerv Ment Dis. 2018;206(8):628–36.
	 22.	 Arroyo-Aniló EM, Souchaud C, Ingrand P, Chamorro Sánchez
J, Melero Ventola A, Gil R. Alexithymia in Alzheimer’s dis‑
ease. J Clin Med. 2020;10(1):44.
	 23.	 Nadeau SE. Treatment of disorders of emotional compre‑
hension, expression, and emotional semantics. Handbook of
112
K. M. Heilman, S. E. Nadeau

1 3
Clinical Neurology: Emotional Disorders Associated with
Neurological Diseases. 2021;183:283–97.
	 24.	 Mortby ME, Adler L, Agüera-Ortiz L, Bateman DR, Broidaty
H, Cantillon M, et al. Apathy as a treatmet target in Alzhei‑
mer’s disease: implications for clinical trials. Arch Gen Psy‑
chiatry. 2021.
	 25.	 Miller DS, Robert P, Ereshefsky L, Adler L, Bateman D, Cummings
J, et al. Diagnostic criteria for apathy in neurocognitive disorders.
Alzheimer’s Dement. 2021:1–13.
	 26.	 Marin RS. Apathy: concept, syndrome, neural mechanisms,
and treatment. Semin Clin Neuropsychiatry. 1996;1:304–14.
	 27.	 Starkstein SE, Mayberg HS, Preziosi TJ, Andrezejewski P,
Leiguarda R, Robinson RG. Reliability, validity, and clinical
correlates of apathy in Parkinson’s disease. J Psychiatry Clin
Neurosci. 1992;4:134–9.
	 28.	 Sockeel P, Dujardine K, Devos D, Deneve C, Destée A, Defebvre
L. The Lille apathy rating scale (LARS), a new instrument for
detecting and quantifying apathy: validation in Parkinson’s dis‑
ease. J Neurol, Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2006;77:579–84.
	 29.	 Ang Y-S, Lockwood P, Apps MAJ, Muhammed K, Husain M.
Dinstinct subtypes of apathy revealed by the apathy motivation
index. PLoS ONE. 2017;12(e0169938).
	 30.	 Strauss ME, Sperry SD. An informant-based assessment of
apathy in Alzheimer disease. Neuropsychiatry Neuropsychol
Behav Neurol. 2002;17:176–83.
	 31.	 Cummings JL. The Neuropsychiatric Inventory Questionnaire. 1994.
https://​www.​NPIte​st.​net.
	 32.	 Clarke DE, Ko JY, Kuhl EA, van Reekum R, Salvador R, Marin
RS. Are the available apathy measures reliable and valid? A review
of the psychometric evidence. J Psychosom Res. 2011;70:73–97.
	 33.	 Mohammad D, Ellis C, Rau A, Rosenberg PB, Mintzer J,
Ruthirakuhan M, et al. Psychometric properties of apathy
scales in dementia: a systematic review. J Alzheimers Dis.
2018;66:1065–82.
	 34.	 Robert P, Lanctot KL, Agüera-Ortiz L, Aalten P, Bremond
F, D’efrancesco M, et al. Is it time to revise the diagnostic
criteria for apathy in brain disorders? The 2018 international
consensus group. Eur Psychiatry. 2018;54:71–6.
	 35.	 Arnts H, van Erp WS, Lavrijsen JCM, van Gaal S, Gorenewegen
HJ, van den Mnckhof P. On the pathophysiology and treatment
of akinetic mutism. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2020;112:270–8.
	 36.	 Braak H, Braak E. Neuropathological staging of Alzheimerrelated changes. Acta Neuropathol. 1991;82:239–59.
	 37.	 Lang PJ, Bradley MM, Cuthbert BN. International affective
picture system (IAPS): instruction manual and affective ratings.
Gainesville, Florida: Center of Research in Psychophysiology,
University of Florida; 1999.
	 38.	 Bradley MM, Lang PJ. Fearfulness and affective evaluations of
pictures. Motiv Emot. 1999;23:1–13.
	 39.	 Joshi A, Jimenez E, Mendez MF. Initial heart rate reactivity to
socioemotional pictures in early-onset Alzheimer’s disease. J
Alzheimers Dis. 2017;60(4):1325–32.
	 40.	 Barnhart WJ, Makela EH, Latocha MJ. SSRI-induced apathy
syndrome: a clinical review. J Psychiatric Pract. 2004;10:196–9.
	 41.	 Goodwin GM, Price J, De Bodinat C, Laredo J. Emotional blunt‑
ing with antidepressant treatments: a survey among depressed
patients. J Affect Disord. 2017;221:31–5.
	 42.	 Marin RS, Biedrzycki RC, Firinciogullari S. Reliability and validity
of the apathy evaluation scale. Psychiatry Res. 1991;38(2):143–62.
	 43.	 van Dyck CH, Arnsten AFT, Padala PR, Brawnman-Mintzer O,
Lerner AJ, Portsteinsson AP, et al. Neurobiologic rationale for
treatment of apathy in Alzheimer’s disease with methylphenidate.
Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2021;29(1):51–62.
	 44.	 Ruthirakuhan MT, Herrmann N, Abraham EH, Lanctot KL.
Pharmacological interventions for apathy in Alzheimer’s
disease (Review). Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2018 (5. Art.
No.:CD012197).
	 45.	 Rea R, Carotenuto A, Traini E, Fasanaro AM, Manzo V, Amenta
F. Apathy treatment in Alzheimer’s disease: interim results of the
ASCOMALVA Trial. J Alzheimers Dis. 2015;48(2):377–83.
	 46.	 Scassellati C, Ciani M, Maj C, Geroldi C, Zanetti O, Gennarelli
M, et al. Behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia
(BPSD): clinical characterization and genetic correlates in an
Italian Alzheimer’s disease cohort. J Person Med. 2020;10:90.
	 47.	 Deardorff WJ, Grossberg GT. Behavioral and psychological
symptoms in Alzheimer’s dementia and vascular dementia.
Handb Clin Neurol. 2019;165:5–32.
	 48.	 Cerejeira J, Lagarto L, Mukaetova-Ladinska EB. Behavioral and
psychological symptoms of dementia. Front Neurol. 2012;3:73.
	 49.	 van der Linde RM, Dening T, Matthews FE, Brayne  C. Grouping of
behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia. Int J Geriatr
Psychiatry. 2014;29:562–8.
	 50.	 Teri L, Ferretti LE, Gibbons LE, Logsdon RG, McCurry SM,
Kukull WA, et al. Anxiety in Alzheimer’s disease: prevalence
and comorbidity. J Gerontol: Med Sci. 1999;54A(7):M348–52.
	 51.	 Joshi A, Jimenez E, Mendez MF. Initial heart rate reactivity to
socioemotional pictures in early-onset Alzheimer’s disease. J
Alzheimer’s Dis. 2017;60(4):1325–32.
	 52.	 Kaiser NC, Liang LJ, Melrose SS, Wilkins SS, Sultzer DL, Mendez MF.
Differences in anxiety among patients with early- versus late-onsert
Alzheimer’s disease. J Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2014;26(1):73–80.
	 53.	 Cummings J, Mintzer J, Brodaty H, Sano M, Banerjee S,
Devanand DP, et al. Agitation in cognitive disorders: Interna‑
tional Psychogeriatric Association provisional consensus clinical
and research definition. Int Psychogeriatr. 2015;27:7–17.
	 54.	 Zuidema S, Koopmans R, Verhey F. Prevalence and predictors
of neuropsychiatric symptoms in cognitively impaired nursing
home patients. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 2007;20:41–9.
	 55.	 Sloane PD, Mitchell CM, Preisser JS, Phillips C, Commander
C, Burker E. Environmental correlates of resident agitation
in Alzheimer’s disease special care units. J Am Geriatr Soc.
1998;46:862–9.
	 56.	 Livingston G, Marston L, Rapaport P, Livingston D, Cousins
S, Robertson S, et al. Prevalence of and associations with agita‑
tion in residents with dementia living in care homes: MARQUE
cross-sectional study. Brit J Psychiatry Open. 2017;3:171–8.
	 57.	 Liu KY, Costello H, Reeves S, Howard R, for the Alzheimer’s
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. The relationship between anxi‑
ety and incident agitation in Alzheimer’s disease. J Alzheimer’s
Dis. 2020;78:1119–27.
	 58.	 Ballard CG, Coate B, Abler V, Stankovic S, Foff E. Evaluation
of the efficacy of pimavanserin in the treatment of agitation and
aggression in patients with Alzheimer’s disease psychosis: a post
hoc analysis. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2020;35:1402–8.
	 59.	 Carrarini C, Russo M, Dono F, Barbone F, Rispoli MG, Ferri L,
et al. Agitation and dementia; prevention and treatment strategies
in acute and chronic conditions. Front Neurol. 2021;12:644317.
	 60.	 Peters ME, Schwartz S, Han D, Rabins PV, Steinberg M,
Tschanz JT, et al. Neuropsychiatric symptoms as predictors
of progression to severe Alzheimer’s dementia and death: the
Cache County dementia progression study. Am J Psychiatry.
2015;172:460–5.
	 61.	 Gaugler JE, Wall MM, Kane RL, Menk JS, Sarsour K, Johnston
JA, et al. The effects of incident and persistent behavioral prob‑
lems on change in caregiver burden and nursing home admission
of persons with dementia. Med Care. 2010;48:875–83.
	 62.	 Cloutier M, Gauthier-Loiselle M, Gagnon-Sanschagrin P, Guerin
A, Hartry A, Baker RA, et al. institutionalization risk and costs
associated with agitation in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers
Dem: Transl Res Clin Intervent. 2019;5:851–61.
113
Emotional and Neuropsychiatric Disorders Associated with Alzheimer’s Disease

1 3
	 63.	 Olin JT, Schneider LS, Katz IR, Meyers BS, Alexopoulos GS,
Breitner JC, et al. Provisional diagnostic criteria for depression
of Alzheimer disease. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2002;10:125–8.
	 64.	 Sheikh JI, Yesavage JA. Geriatric depression scale (GDS): recent
evidence and development of a shorter version. Clin Gerontol.
1986;5:165–73.
	 65.	 Alexopolous GS, Abrams RC, Young RC, Shamoian CA.
Cornell scale for depression in dementia. Biol Psychiatry.
1988;23(3):271–84.
	 66.	 Orgeta V, Tabet N, Nilforooshan R, Howard R. Efficacy of antide‑
pressants for depression in Alzheimer’s disase: systematic review
and meta-analysis. J Alzheimers Dis. 2017;58:725–33.
	 67.	 Reifler BV, Larson E, Hanley R. Coexistence of cognitive impair‑
ment and depression in geriatric outpatients. Am J Psychiatry.
1982;139(5):623–6.
	 68.	 Cummings JL, Miller B, Hill MA, Neshkes R. Neuropsychiatric
aspects of multi-infarct dementia and dementia of the Alzheimer
type. Arch Neurol. 1987;44(4):389–93.
	 69.	 Chi S, Yu J-T, Tan M-S, Tan L. Depression in Alzheimer’s dis‑
ease: epidemiology, mechanisms, and management. J Alzheimers
Dis. 2014;42(3):739–55.
	 70.	 Ismail Z, Elbayoumi H, Fischer CE, Hogan DB, Millikin CP,
Schweizer T, et al. Prevalence of depression in patients with mild
cognitive impairment: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
JAMA Psychiat. 2017;74(1):58–67.
	 71.	 Kempton MJ, Salvador Z, Munafò MR, Geddes JR, Simmons
A, Frangou S, et al. Structural neuroimaging studies in major
depressive disorder. Meta-analysis and comparison with bipolar
disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2011;68(7):675–90.
	 72.	 Zweig RM, Ross CA, Hedreen JC, Steele C, Cardillo ER, Whitehouse
PJ, et al. Neuropathology of aminergic nuclei in Alzheimer’s dis‑
eease. Progr Clin Biol Res. 1989;317:353–65.
	 73.	 Burke AD, Goldfarb D, Bollam P, Khokher S. Diagnosing and
treating depression in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Neurol
Ther. 2019;8(2):325–50.
	 74.	 Starkstein SE, Jorge RE, Mizrahi S, Robinson RG. The construct
of minor and major depression in Alzheimer’s disease. Am J
Psychiatry. 2005;162(11):2086–93.
	 75.	 Zubenko GS, Zubenko WN, McPherson S, Spoor E, Marin DB,
Farlow MR, et al. A collaborative study of the emergence and
clinical features of the major depressive syndrome of Alzhei‑
mer’s disease. Am J Psychiatry. 2003;160(5):857–66.
	 76.	 Naasan G, Shdo SM, Rodriguez EM, Spina S, Grinberg L,
Lopez L, et al. Psychosis in neurodegenerative disease: differ‑
ential patterns of hallucination and delusion symptoms. Brain.
2021;144:999–1012.
	 77.	 Zhao Q-F, Tan L, Wang H-F, Jiang T, Tan M-S, Tan L, et al.
The prevalence of neuropsychiatric symptoms in Alzheimer’s
disease: systematic review and meta-analysis. J Affect Disord.
2016;190:264–71.
	 78.	 Karttunen K, Karppi P, Hiltunenm A, Vanhanen M, Välimäki T,
Martikainen J, et al. Neuropsychiatric symptoms and quality of
life in patients with very mild and mild Alzheimer’s disease. Int
J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2011;26:473–82.
	 79.	 Herrmann N, Lanctot KL, Sambrook R, Lesnikova N, Hébert
R, McCracken P, et al. The contribution of neuropsychiatric
symptoms to the cost of dementia care. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry.
2006;21:972–6.
	 80.	 Scarmeas N, Brandt J, Albert M, Hadjigeorgiou G, Papadimitriou
A, Dubois B, et al. Delusions and hallucinations are associ‑
ated with worse outcome in Alzheimer disease. Arch Neurol.
2005;62(10):1601–8.
	 81.	 American Psychiatric Association Work Group on Alzheimer’s
Disease and Other Dementias. Practice Guideline for the Treat‑
ment of Patients with Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Demen‑
tias. Second Ed: American Psychiatric Association; 2007.
	 82.	 Dudas R, Malouf R, McCleery J, Dening T. Antidepressants for
treating depression in dementia (review). Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2018(8):CD003944.
	 83.	 Cohen-Mansfield J, Lipson S. The utility of pain assessment for
analgesic use in persons with dementia. Pain. 2008;134:16–23.
	 84.	 Wei Y-JJ, Chen C, Fillingim RB, DeKosky ST, Schmidt S,
Pahor M, et al. Uncontrolled pain and risk for depression and
behavioral sykmptoms in residents with dementia. J Am Med
Dir Assoc. 2021;05.010.
	 85.	 Husebo BS, Ballard C, Sandvik R, Nilsen OB, Aarsland D.
Efficacy of treating pain to reduce behavioral disturbances in
residents of nursing homes with dementia: cluster randomised
clinical trial. BMJ. 2011;343:d4065.
	 86.	 Habiger TF, Flo E, Achterberg WP, Husebo BS. The inter‑
activer relationship between pain, psychosis, and agitation in
people with dementia: results from a cluster-randomized clini‑
cal trial. Behav Neurol. 2016;2016(Article ID 7036415).
	 87.	 Husebo BS, Ballard C, Cohen-Mansfield J, Seifert R, Aarsland D.
The response of agitated behavior to pain management in persons
with dementia. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2014;22:708–17.
	 88.	 Cordone S, Scarpelli S, Alfonsi V, De Gennaro L, Gorgoni M.
Sleep-based interventions in Alzheimer’s disease: promising
approaches from prevention to treatment along the disease tra‑
jectory. Pharmaceuticals. 2021;14(383).
	 89.	 Peter-Derex L, Yammine P, Bastuji H, Croisile B. Sleep and Alz‑
heimer’s disease. Sleep Med Rev. 2015;19:29–38.
	 90.	 Rose KM, Beck C, Tsai PF, Liem PH, Davila DG, Kleban M,
et al. Sleep disturbances and nocturnal agitation behaviors in
older adults with dementia. Sleep. 2011;34:779–86.
	 91.	 Terum TM, Andersen JR, Rongve A, Aarsland D, Svendsboe
EJ, Testad I. The relationship of specific items on the neuropsy‑
chiatric inventory to caregiver burden in dementia: a systematic
review. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2017;32:703–17.
	 92.	 Richards KC, Allen RP, Morrison J, Kovach CR, Rangel A,
Loera A, et al. Nighttime agitation in persons with dementia as
a manifestation of restless legs syndrome. J Am Med Dir Assoc.
2020. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jamda.​2020.​11.​026.
	 93.	 Figueiro MG, Plitnick B, Roohan C, Sahin L, Kalsher M, Rea
MS. Effects of a tailored lightning intervention on sleep quality,
rest-activity, mood, and behavior in older adults with Alzheimer
disease and related dementias: a randomized clinical trial. J Clin
Sleep Med. 2019;15(12):1757–67.
	 94.	 Mitolo M, Tonon C, La Morgia C, Testa C, Carelli V, Lodi R.
Effects of light treatment on sleep, cognition, mood, and behav‑
ior in Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review. Dement Geriatr
Cogn Disord. 2018;46:371–84.
	 95.	 Mullins AE, Kam K, Parekh A, Bubu OM, Osorio RS, Varga
AW. Obstructive sleep apnea and its treatment in aging: effects
on Alzheimer’s disease biomarkers, cognition, brain structure,
and neurophysiology. Neurobiol Dis. 2020;145(105054).
	 96.	 Jaffer KY, Chang T, Vanle B, Dang J, Steiner AJ, Loea N, et al.
Trazodone for insomnia: a systematic review. Innov Clin Neuro‑
sci. 2017;14:24–34.
	 97.	 Camargos EG, Lousada LL, Quintas JL, Naves JOS, Lousada FM,
Nóbrega OT. Trazodone improves sleep parameters in Alzhei‑
mer disease patients: a randomized, double-blind, and placebocontrolled study. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2014;22:1565–74.
	 98.	 Herring WJ, Ceesay P, Synder E, Bliwise D, Budd K, Hutzelmann
J, et al. Polysomnographic assessment of suvorexant in patients
with probable Alzheimer’s disease dementia and insomnia: a ran‑
domized trial. Alzheimer’s Dem. 2019;16:641–551.
	 99.	 Cummings J. New approaches to symptomatic treatments for
Alzheimer’s disease. Molecular Degen. 2021;16(2).
	100.	 Konovalov S, Muralee S, Tampi RR. Anticonvulsants for the
treatment of behavioral and psychological symptoms of demen‑
tia: a literature review. Int Psychogeriatr. 2008;20:293–308.
114
K. M. Heilman, S. E. Nadeau

1 3
	101.	 Tariot PN, Schneider LS, Cummings J, Thomas RG, Raman R,
Jakimovich LJ, et al. Chronic divalproex sodium to attentuate
agitation and clinical progression of Alzheimer disease. Arch
Gen Psychiatry. 2012;68:853–61.
	102.	 Tariot PN, Erb R, Podgorski CA, Cox C, Patel S, Jakimovich L,
et al. Efficacy and tolerability of carbamazepine for agitation and
aggression in dementia. Am J Psychiatry. 1998;155:54–61.
	103.	 Cummings J, Lai T-J, Hemrungrojn S, Mohandas E, Kim SY,
Nair G, et al. Role of donepezil in the management of neuropsy‑
chiatric symptoms in Alzheimer’s disease and dementia with
Lewy bodies. CNS Neurosci Ther. 2016;22:159–66.
	104.	 Campbell N, Ayub A, Boustani MA, Fox C, Farlow M, Maidment
I, et al. Impact of cholinesterase inhibitors on behavioral and
psychological symptoms of Alzheimer’s disease: a meta-analysis.
Clin Interv Aging. 2008;3:719–28.
	105.	 Rodda J, Morgan S, Walker Z. Are cholinesterase inhibitors
effective in the management of the behavioral and psycho‑
logical symptoms of dementia in Alzheimer’s disease? A sys‑
tematic review of randomized, placebo-controlled trials of
donepezil, rivastigmine and galantamine. Int Psychogeriatr.
2009;21(5):813–24.
	106.	 Holmes C, Wilkinson D, Dean C, Vethanayagam S, Olivieri S,
Langley A, et al. The efficacy of donepezil in the treatment of
neuropsychiatric symptoms in Alzheimer disease. Neurology.
2004;63:214–9.
	107.	 Mega MS, Masterman DM, O’Connor SM, Barclay TR, Cummings
JL. The spectrum of behavioral responses to cholinesterase inhibitor
therapy in Alzheimer disease. Arch Neurol. 1999;56:1388–93.
	108.	 Cummings J, McRae T, Zhang R, The Donepezil-Sertraline
Study Group. Symptoms in patients with dementia and severe
behavioral disorders. Arch Geriatr Psychiatry. 2006;14:605–12.
	109.	 Porsteinsson AP, Drye LT, Pollock BG, Devanand DP, Frangakis C,
Ismail Z, et al. Effect of citalopram on agitation in Alzheimer dis‑
ease. The CitAD randomized clinical trial JAMA. 2014;311:682–91.
	110.	 Leonpacher AK, Peters ME, Drye LT, Makino KM, Newell JA,
Devanand DP, et al. Effects of citalopram on neuropsychiatric
symptoms in Alzheimer’s dementia: evidence from the CitAD
study. Am J Psychiatry. 2016;173:473–80.
	111.	 Banerjee S, High J, Stirling S, Shepstone L, Swart AM, Telling
T, et al. Stufy of mirtazapine for agitated behaviours in demen‑
tia (SYMBAD): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial. Lancet. 2021;398:1487–97.
	112.	 Calsolaro V, Antognoli R, O’Koye C, Monzani F. The use of
antipsychotic drugs for treating behavioral symptoms in Alzhei‑
mer’s disease. Front Pharmacol. 2019;10(1465).
	113.	 Vigen CLP, Mack WJ, Keefe R, Sano M, Sultzer D, Stroup S,
et al. Cognitive effects of atypical antipsychotic medications in
patients with Alzheimer’s disease: outcomes from CATIE-AD.
Am J Psychiatry. 2011;168:831–9.
	114.	 Ralph SJ, Espinet AJ. Increased all-cause mortality by antipsy‑
chotic drugs: updated review and meta-analysis in dementia and
general mental health care. J Alzheimers Dis Rep. 2018;2:1–26.
	115.	 Farlow MR, Shamliyan TA. Benefits and harms of atypical antip‑
sychotics for agitation in adults with dementia. Eur Neuropsy‑
chopharmacol. 2017;27:217–31.
	116.	 Schneider LS, Dagerman KS, Insel PS. Efficacy and adverse
effects of atypical antipsychotics for dementia: meta-analysis of
randomized, placebo-controlled trials. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry.
2006;14:191–210.
	117.	 Ballard C, Khan Z, Cummings J, Demos G, Coate B, Youakim
JM, et al. Evaluation of the safety, tolerability, and efficacy of
pimavanserin versus placebo in patients with Alzheimer’s disease
psychosis: a phase 2, randomised, placebo-controlled doubleblind study. Lancet Neurol. 2018;17:213–22.
	118.	 Tariot PN, Cummings JL, Soto-Martin ME, Ballard C, Erten-Lyons
D, Sultzer DL, et al. Trial of pimavanserin in dementia-related psy‑
chosis. N Engl J Med. 2021;385:309–19.
	119.	 Hwang YJ, Alexander GC, An H, Moore TJ, Mehta HB.
Risk of hospitalization and death associated with pimavan‑
serin use in older adults with Parkinson disease. Neurology.
2021;97:e1266–75.
	120.	 American Geriatrics Society 2015 Beers Criteria Update Expert
Panel. American Geriatrics Society. updated Beers criteria for
potentially inappropriate medication use in older adults. J Am
Geriatr Soc. 2015;2015(63):2227–46.
	121.	 Kirkham J, Sherman C, Velkers C, Maxwell C, Gill S, Rochon
P, et  al. Antipsychotic use in dementia. Can J Psychiatry.
2017;62:170–81.
	122.	 Ballard CG, Saad K, Patel A, Gahir M, Solis M, Coope B, et al.
The prevalence and phenomenology of psychotic symptoms in
dementia sufferers. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 1995;10:477–85.
	123.	 Ballard C, O’Brien J, Coope B, Fairbairn A, Abid F, Wilcock G.
A prospective study of psychotic symptoms in dementia suffer‑
ers: psychosis in dementia. Int Psychogeriatr. 1997;9:57–64.
	124.	 Fick DM, Cooper JW, Wade WE, Waller JL, Maclean JR,
Beers MH. Updating the Beers criteria for potentially inap‑
popriate medication use in older adults. Arch Intern Med.
2003;163:2716–24.
	125.	 Defrancesco M, Marksteiner J, Fleischhacker WW, Blasko I. Use
of benzodiazepines in Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review
of the literature. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2015:1–11.
	126.	 Bandelow B, Reitt M, Röver C, Michaelis S, Görlich Y, Wedekind
D. Efficacy of treatments for anxiety disorders: a meta-analysis. Int
Clin Psychopharmacol. 2015;30:183–92.
	127.	 Tseng L-Y, Huang S-T, Peng L-N, Hsiao F-Y. Benzodiazepines,
z-hypnotics, and risk of dementia: special considerations of helflives and concomitant use. Neurotherapeutics. 2020;17:156–64.
	128.	 DeKosky ST, Williamson JB. The long and the short of benzo‑
diazepines and sleep medications: short-term benefits, long-term
harms? Neurotherapeutics. 2020;17:153–5.
	129.	 Shash D, Kurth T, Bertrand M, Dufouil C, Barberger-Gateau P,
Berr C, et al. Benzodiazepine, psychotrophic medication, and
dementia. A population-based cohort study Alzheimers Dement.
2016;112:604–13.
	130.	 Grossi CM, Richardson K, Fox C, Maidment I, Steel N, Loke YK,
et al. Anticholinergic and benzodiazepine medication use and risk of
incident dementia: a UK cohort study. BMC Geriatr. 2019;19:276.
	131.	 Paunescu H, Dima L, Ghita I, Coman L, Ifteni PI, Fulga I, et al. A
systematic review of clinical studies on the effect of psychoactive
cannabinoids in psychiatric conditions in Alzheimer dementia.
Am J Ther. 2020;27:e249–69.
	132.	 Bahji A, Meyyappan AC, Hawken ER. Cannabinoids for the neu‑
ropsychiatric symptoms of dementia: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Can J Psychiatry. 2019;65(6):365–76.
	133.	 Liu KY, Borissova A, Mahmood J, Elliott T, Knowles M,
Bentham P, et al. Pharmacological treatment trials of agitation
in Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review of ClinicalTrials.
gove registered trials. Alzheimers Dement. 2021;2021(e12157).
	134.	 Cummings JL, Lyketsos CG, Peskind ER, Porsteinsson AP, Mintzer
JE, Scharre DW, et al. Effect of dextromethorphan-quinidine on agi‑
tation in patients with Alzheimer disease dementia. A randomized
clinical trial JAMA. 2015;314(12):1242–54.
	135.	 Wilcock GK, Ballard CG, Cooper JA, Loft H. Memantine for
agitation/aggression and psychosis in moderately severe to severe
Alzheimer’s disease: a pooled analysis of 3 studies. J Clin Psy‑
chiatry. 2008;69:341–8.
	136.	 Gauthier S, Loft H, Cummings J. Improvement in behavioral
symptoms in patients with moderate to severe Alzheimer’s
115
Emotional and Neuropsychiatric Disorders Associated with Alzheimer’s Disease

1 3
disease by memantine: a pooled data analysis. Int J Geriatr Psy‑
chiatry. 2008;23:537–45.
	137.	 Fox C, Crugel M, Maidment I, Auestad BH, Coulton S,
Treloar A, et al. Efficacy of memantine for agitation in Alzhei‑
mer’s dementia: a randomised double-blind placebo controlled
trial. PLoS ONE. 2012;7(5:e35185).
	138.	 Herrmann N, Gauthier S, Boneva N, Lemming OM, 10158
Investigators. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial of memantine in a behaviorally enriched sample of patients
with moderate-to-severe Alzheimer’s disease. Int Psychogeriatr.
2013;25(6):919–27.
	139.	 Peskind ER, Tsuang DW, Bonner LT, Pascualy M, Riekse RG,
Snowden MB, et al. Propranolol for disruptive behaviors in nurs‑
ing home residents with probable or possible Alzheimer dis‑
ease. A plecebo-controlled study. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord.
2008;19:23–8.
	140.	 Ballard C, Orrell M, YongZhong S, Moniz-Cook E, Staffort J,
Whittaker R, et al. Impact of antipsychotic review and nonphar‑
macological intervention on antipsychotic use, neuropsychiat‑
ric symptoms, and mortality in people with dementia living in
nursing homes: a factorial cluster-randomized controlled trial by
the Well-Being and Health for People with Dementia (WHELD)
Program. Am J Psychiatry. 2016;173:252–62.
	141.	 Fossey J, Ballard C, Juszczak E, James I, Alder N, Jacoby R,
et al. Effect of enhanced psychosocial care on antipsychotic use
in nursing home residents with severe dementia: cluster ran‑
domised trial. BMJ. 2006. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1136/​bmj.​38782.​
575868.​7C.
	142.	 Livingston G, Kelly L, Lewis-Holms E, Baio G, Morris S, Patel
N, et al. Non-pharmacological interventions for agitation in
dementia: systematic review of randomised controlled trials. Br
J Psychiatry. 2014;205:436–42.
	143.	 Abraha I, Rimland JM, Trotta FM, Dell’Aquila G, Cruz-Jentoft
C, Petrofic M, et al. Systematic review of systematic reviews of
non-pharrmacological interventions to treat behabioural distur‑
bances in older patients with dementia. The SENATOR-OnTop
series. BMJ Open. 2017;7:e012759.
	144.	 Na R, Yeom Y, Kim YJ, Byun S, Kim K, Kim KW. A system‑
atic review and meta-analysis of nonpharmacological inter‑
ventions for moderate to severe dementia. Psychiatry Invest.
2019;16:325–35.
	145.	 Kales HC, Gitlin LN, Lyketsos CG. Management of neuropsy‑
chiatric symptoms of dementia in clinical settings: recommenda‑
tions from a multidisciplinary expert panel. J Am Geriatr Soc.
2014;62:762–9.
	146.	 Kales HC, Gitlin LN, Kyketsos CG. State of the art review:
assessment and management of behavioral and psychological
symptoms of dementia. BMJ. 2015;350.
	147.	 Kales HC, Lyketsos CG, Miller EM, Ballard C. Management of
behavioral and psychological symptoms in people with Alzhei‑
mer’s disease: an international Delphi consensus. Int Psychogeri‑
atr. 2019;31(1):83–90.
	148.	 De Deyn P, Jeste DP, Swanink R, Kostic D, Breder C, Carson
WH, et al. Aripiprazole for the treatment of psychosis in patients
with Alzheimer’s disease. A randomized, placebo-controlled
trial. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2005;25:463–7.
	149.	 Mintzer JE, Tune LE, Breder CD, Swanink R, Marcus RN,
McQuade RD, et al. Aripiprazole for the treatment of psychoses
in institutionalized patients with Alzheimer dementia: a multi‑
center, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled assessment
of three fixed doses. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2007;15:918–31.
	150.	 Streim JE, Porsteinsson AP, Breder CD, Swanink R, Marcus
R, McQuade R, et al. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled study of aripiprazole for the treatment of psychosis
in nursing home patients with Alzheimer disease. Am J Geriatr
Psychiatry. 2008;16:537–50.
	151.	 De Deyn PP, Carrasco MM, Debert W, Jeandel C, Hay DP, Feldman
PD, et al. Olanzapine versus placebo in the treatment of psy‑
chosis with or without associated behavioral disturbances in
patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry.
2004;19:115–26.
	152.	 Debert WG, Dysken MW, Rappaport SA, Feldman PD, Young
CA, Hay DP, et al. Comparison of olanzapine and risperidone
in the treatment of psychosis and associated behavioral dis‑
turbances in patients with dementia. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry.
2005;13:722–30.
	153.	 Street JS, Clark WS, Gannon KS, Cummings J, Bymaster FP,
Tamura RN, et al. Olanzapine treatment of psychotic and behav‑
ioral symptoms in patients with Alzheimer disease in nursing
care facilities. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2000;57:968–76.
	154.	 Sultzer DL, Davis SM, Tariot PN, Dagerman KS, Lebowitc
BD, Lyketsos CG, et al. Clinical symptom responses to atypical
antipsychotic medications in Alzheimer’s disease: phase 1 out‑
comes from the CATIE-AD effectiveness trial. Am J Psychiatry.
2008;165:844–54.
	155.	 Tariot PN, Schneider L, Katz IR, Mintzer JE, Street JS, Copenhaver
M, et al. Quetiapine treatment of psychosis associated with demen‑
tia: a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial.
Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2006;14:767–76.
	156.	 Zhong KX, Tariot PN, Mintzer J, Minkwitz MC, Devine NA.
Quetiapine to treat agitation in dementia: a randomized, doubleblind, placebo-controlled study. Cur Alz Res. 2007;4:81–93.
	157.	 Brodaty H, Ames D, Snowdon J, Woodward M, Kirwan J, Clarnette
R, et al. A randomized placebo-controlled trial of risperidone for
the treatment of aggression, agitation, and psychosis of dementia.
J Clin Psychiatry. 2003;64:134–43.
	158.	 Katz IR, Jeste DP, Mintzer JE, Clyde C, Napolitano J, Brecher M,
et al. Comparison of risperidone and placebo for psychosis and
behavioral disturbances associated with dementia: a randomized,
double-blind trial. J Clin Psychiatry. 1999;60:107–15.
	159.	 Mintzer J, Greenspan A, Caers I, Van Hove I, Kushner S, Weiner
M, et al. Risperidone in the treatment of psychosis of Alzheimer
disease: results from a prospective clinical trial. Am J Geriatr
Psychiatry. 2006;14:280–91.
	160.	 Grossberg GT, Kohegyi E, Mergel V, Josiassen MK, Meulien
D, Hobart M, et al. Efficacy and safety of brexpiprazole for the
treatment of agitation in Alzheimer’s dementia: two 12-week,
randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled trials. Am J Geriatr
Psychiatry. 2020;28(4):383–400.
	161.	 Ballard C, Margallo-Lana M, Juszczak E, Douglas S, Swann
A, Thomas A, et al. Quetiapine and rivastigmine and cognitive
decline in Alzheimer’s disease: randomised double blind placebo
controlled trial. BMJ. 2005;330(7496).
	162.	 De Deyn PP, Rabheru K, Rasmussen A, Bocksberger JP, Dautzenberg
PLJ, Eriksson S, et al. A randomized trial of risperidone, placebo,
and haloperidol for behiavoral symptoms of dementia. Neurology.
1999;53(5):946–55.
Publisher's Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
116
K. M. Heilman, S. E. Nadeau
