CRBP: A Benchmark Dataset of Color-Rendered 3-D-to-2.5-D Facial Projections
Sharma, S., Sood, A., & Kumar, V. (2026). CRBP: A Benchmark Dataset of Color-Rendered 3-D-to-2.5-D Facial
Projections. IT Professional, 28(1), 59-65. https://doi.org/10.1109/MITP.2025.3624674
Link to publication record in Ulster University Research Portal
Published in:
IT Professional
Publication Status:
Published (in print/issue): 18/02/2026
DOI:
10.1109/MITP.2025.3624674
Document Version
Author Accepted version
For Author Accepted Manuscripts (AAM) published under Ulster University's Rights Retention Policy for Scholarly Works
(RRPSW)
When citing an AAM published under Ulster University's RRPSW please use the following citation structure:
Author, A. A. (Year). Title of article. Journal Name, [Accepted Author Manuscript]. PURE Portal URL. Licensed under CC BY 4.0.
General rights
The copyright and moral rights to the output are retained by the output author(s), unless otherwise stated by the document licence.
Unless otherwise stated, users are permitted to download a copy of the output for personal study or non-commercial research and are
permitted to freely distribute the URL of the output. They are not permitted to alter, reproduce, distribute or make any commercial use of the
output without obtaining the permission of the author(s).
If the document is licenced under Creative Commons, the rights of users of the documents can be found at
https://creativecommons.org/share-your-work/cclicenses/.
Take down policy
The Research Portal is Ulster University's institutional repository that provides access to Ulster's research outputs. Every effort has been
made to ensure that content in the Research Portal does not infringe any person's rights, or applicable UK laws. If you discover content in
the Research Portal that you believe breaches copyright or violates any law, please contact pure-support@ulster.ac.uk
Download date: 28/04/2026

CRBP: A Benchmark Dataset of
Color-Rendered 3D-to-2.5D Facial Projections
Sahil Sharma, Member, IEEE, Ulster University, Londonderry, United Kingdom
Ashima Sood, Student Member, IEEE, Ulster University, Londonderry, United Kingdom
Vijay Kumar, Dr B R Ambedkar National Institute of Technology, Jalandhar, India
Abstract—The Colour-Rendered Bosphorus Projections (CRBP) Face Dataset
overcomes key limitations in 3D facial analysis by offering a photometrically
normalised, multi-view dataset specifically tailored for 2.5D modelling. CRBP
utilizes the Bosphorus 3D Face Database, reconstructing textured 3D meshes
for each individual and producing six canonical 2D projections, such as frontal,
oblique, and profile views, employing subject-specific colour normalisation, where
the average RGB value of each subject’s texture replaces detailed texture, ensuring
photometric consistency, together with camera-aligned lighting. To improve
model compatibility and minimize background noise, each projection is processed
using YOLOv8 for face detection. This results in two organised subsets, namely,
CRBP-Raw (full-scene) and CRBP-YOLOv8 (face-cropped). This dual-format
design facilitates thorough benchmarking of pose-invariant, occlusion-resilient, and
expression-aware models within CNN-compatible image space. Dataset statistics
indicate that YOLOv8 enhances facial alignment; however, it also introduces sample
selection bias, especially in extreme yaw and occlusion scenarios. Benchmark
experiments utilising EfficientNet-B0 demonstrate enhanced balanced accuracy
(84.7%) and MCC (0.859) for CRBP-YOLOv8 in comparison to CRBP-Raw,
thereby validating the effectiveness of face-localized views. CRBP facilitates
applications in emotion recognition, biometric authentication, and avatar creation.
It is accessible through IEEE DataPort: https://dx.doi.org/10.21227/4qns-ys45.
T
hree-dimensional (3D) facial analysis supports
healthcare applications like anxiety and dementia screening, education, including student engagement monitoring, and security, including biometric
authentication, biometric verification, surveillance, and
human–computer interaction. As these fields require
real-time and reliable systems, models must manage
position variation, illumination changes, occlusions,
and delicate expressions. Three-dimensional (3D) facial datasets improve geometry and identification feature representation. Many available datasets lack consistent colour information and structured projections,
limiting their use by practitioners and deep learning
frameworks.
Notable 3D datasets, including BU-3DFE [1], Texas
3D [2], and Bosphorus [3], provide high-resolution
geometry; however, they often exhibit deficiencies in
photometric consistency, multi-view diversity, and fa-
XXXX-XXX © 2021 IEEE
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/XXX.0000.0000000
cial focus. These issues impede their appropriateness
for contemporary deep learning systems, particularly
those utilising image-level inputs. Moreover, these systems are not intended for benchmarking 2.5D models,
which function based on 2D projections obtained from
3D geometry.
We present the Colour-Rendered Bosphorus Projections (CRBP) dataset as a solution to these limitations. This dataset serves as a structured, colorconsistent benchmark derived from the Bosphorus 3D
Face Database. CRBP offers six standard 2D projections for each subject, including frontal, oblique, and
profile perspectives. The projections maintain threedimensional geometric accuracy and photometric consistency. A fine-tuned YOLOv8 face detector1 is employed to eliminate non-facial background clutter and
enhance alignment by producing tightly cropped variants.
1arnabdhar/YOLOv8-Face-Detection
Month
Published by the IEEE Computer Society
Publication Name
1

THEME/FEATURE/DEPARTMENT
CRBP functions within the 2.5D domain, facilitating the integration of raw 3D data with 2D learning frameworks. In contrast to UV-textured meshes
or depth maps, color-rendered projections incorporate
geometric and photometric features in a format compatible with images. The dataset presents controlled
challenges, including pose-induced self-occlusion and
feature asymmetry, thereby serving as a significant
testbed for occlusion-aware and pose-robust models.
CRBP facilitates multiple downstream applications,
such as face recognition across pose variations, expression classification, and avatar construction. The
dataset includes both raw and face-cropped variants
for comparative analysis of preprocessing strategies.
Current 3D datasets frequently lack sufficient detail for facial analysis, primarily due to inconsistent
colour rendering and background noise. CRBP mitigates these deficiencies by providing organised, multiperspective projections that maintain uniform photometric quality and facial localisation, for 2.5D model
evaluation.
The key contributions of this work are:
• The CRBP Face Dataset is presented as a structured, publicly accessible resource comprising
color-rendered 2.5D facial projections sourced
from the Bosphorus 3D Face Database [3].
• The dataset includes six canonical views for
each subject (frontal, oblique, and profile), to
maintain geometric fidelity and facilitate poseaware model training.
• All projections are rendered using a subjectspecific mean colour, computed by averaging
across each subject’s texture map. This replaces
detailed texture with a uniform colour per subject, ensuring photometric consistency across
views while emphasizing geometric fidelity.
• We utilise YOLOv8 for facial localisation to generate a cropped variant (CRBP-YOLOv8) in conjunction with the unprocessed full-scene set
(CRBP-Raw), facilitating a controlled comparison of preprocessing impacts.
• CRBP facilitates the benchmarking of facial analysis models in 2.5D space, by combining 3D
mesh realism with CNN-compatible 2D formats,
particularly under challenging conditions such as
self-occlusion and significant yaw.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses related 3D facial datasets and preprocessing
methods. Section III describes the construction of the
CRBP dataset, including projection rendering and face
detection. Section IV presents dataset statistics and
detection analysis. Section V concludes with future
Colour Rendered 3D Views
3D Mesh and
2D Ground Truth
a. Input View
b. Input view with
elevation 45°
c. Right profile view,
azimuth 90°
d. Left profile view,
azimuth 270°
e. Right three quarter view,
azimuth 45°, elevation 45°
f. Left three quarter view,
azimuth 135°, elevation 45°
FIGURE 1. Augmentation-based Mean-Colour Rendered 3D
Faces
directions and dataset availability.
RELATED WORK
Three-dimensional facial datasets have significantly
contributed to the progress of face recognition, expression analysis, and biometric modeling. Notable benchmarks are BU-3DFE [1], Texas 3D [2], FRGC v2.0 [4],
and the Bosphorus Database [3]. Despite providing
high-resolution 3D geometry, these systems frequently
exhibit issues such as incomplete or inconsistent texture maps, limited view diversity, and background clutter, which diminish their effectiveness in image-based
deep learning applications. Dynamic datasets such as
4DFAB2 and FaceScape3 offer extensive expression
data; however, they do not provide standardized, 2.5D
projections across different views. NoW [5] provides
benchmarks for 2D-to-3D reconstruction; however, it
does not include multiview textured images for training
purposes.
Recent advances in 3D acquisition have not resulted in a sufficient number of publicly available
datasets that integrate structured, color-rendered 2.5D
views with face-localized crops. The existing gap restricts the training and evaluation of facial analysis
models required to function effectively amidst variations in pose, expression, and occlusion.
We introduce CRBP, a dataset specifically designed
for 2.5D facial modeling, ensuring consistent photometric quality, comprehensive multi-view coverage, and
2https://ibug.doc.ic.ac.uk/resources/4dfab/
3https://github.com/zhuhao-nju/facescape
2
Publication Title
Month 2021

THEME/FEATURE/DEPARTMENT
utilizing YOLOv8 for facial region extraction. Practitioners can use CRBP’s structured, color-rendered, facelocalized 2.5D projections without mesh management
or rendering pipelines. Table 1 provides a comparative
analysis of commonly utilised 3D facial datasets. Existing datasets include varying levels of geometric detail and expression diversity; however, they frequently
exhibit deficiencies in colour fidelity, facial isolation,
and structured 2.5D projections. The CRBP dataset
effectively addresses existing gaps by incorporating
consistent color-rendered views, YOLOv8-based facial
cropping, and multi-view projections, making it more
suitable for pose-aware and occlusion-resilient facial
analysis.
TABLE 1. Comparison of 3D Facial Datasets Relevant to
2.5D Facial Analysis. Columns denote: (a) 3D Geometry, (b)
Texture Quality, (c) Multi-view Coverage, (d) Color Consistency, (e) Occlusion Labels, (f) Facial Crops, and (g) 2.5D
Projections.
Dataset
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
BU-3DFE [1]
✓
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
Texas 3D [2]
✓
✓
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
FRGC v2.0 [4]
✓
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
Bosphorus [3]
✓
✗
✗
✗
✓
✗
✗
4DFAB
✓
✓
✗
✓
✗
✗
✗
FaceScape
✓
✓
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
NoW [5]
✓
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
CRBP (Ours)
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
DATASET DESCRIPTION
This study presents the Colour-Rendered Bosphorus
Projections (CRBP) Face Dataset, a resource that integrates high-resolution geometry with photometrically
consistent colour, provided as six canonical 2.5D views
for each subject. CRBP reconstructs textured surface
meshes using raw depth (*.bnt) and texture (*.png)
pairs from the Bosphorus Database [3]. The meshes
are rendered using six predefined camera viewpoints
defined by azimuth and elevation angles (see Figure
1), resulting in 2D projections that maintain 3D shape
cues and are compatible with CNN back-ends4.
To isolate facial content and suppress irrelevant
background
artefacts,
the
YOLOv8-Face-Detection
model [6] is used to automatically localize and crop
each projection. This refinement standardises spatial
alignment across samples and enhances the salience
of facial features, improving data quality for downstream analysis. Unlike conventional 3D datasets that
4See Appendix B (Table B.1) in the supplementary material
for exact azimuth–elevation values of the six viewpoints.
require raw mesh handling or separate rendering
pipelines, CRBP is explicitly structured for 2.5D facial analysis, offering ready-to-train, view-consistent,
colour-aligned images that embed geometry within
image-based formats. The dataset’s multi-view design enables evaluation of pose-robust recognition and
occlusion-aware models, particularly under challenging conditions such as large yaw angles and partial self-occlusion (see Figure A.3), which are underrepresented in most public benchmarks.
Pipeline. The CRBP pipeline starts from the
Bosphorus 3D Face Database [3], which contains 105
subjects (61 males, 44 females). Each subject has
four modalities: a depth map stored in the Bayes-
Net-Toolbox *.bnt format, a canonical RGB texture,
2D landmarks (LM2), and 3D landmarks (LM3). All
assets stored in per-subject folders bsXXX that include
textured meshes (*.obj) and their associated PNG
textures. The details are presented in Algorithm 1.
For each subject, we reconstructed the 3D facial
mesh from raw depth maps (‘*.bnt‘) and aligned them
with the corresponding texture images (‘*.png‘) to form
a textured surface model. The mesh was parsed to
extract vertices and faces, with the vertex set defined
as V = {vi ∈R3 | i = 1, ... , Nv}, where each vertex
vi = (xi, yi, zi) represents a 3D point, and the face set
as F = {fj | j = 1, ... , Nf }, where fj = (vj1, vj2, vj3) are
vertex indices forming triangular facets.
Each texture image I ∈RH×W×3 was reduced to
a subject-specific mean colour vector by averaging all
pixel RGB values:
µnorm =
1
255 · HW
H
X
i=1
W
X
j=1
Ii,j.
(1)
This single colour µnorm replaced the detailed texture and was applied uniformly to all mesh faces of the
subject, producing consistent photometric rendering
across views. Gouraud shading [7] and headlight illumination (camera-aligned lighting) were used for smooth
and standardized visualisation.
Each colored mesh was rendered from six predefined viewpoints, V = {(θk, ϕk) | k = 1, ... , 6}, covering
frontal (0°), oblique (±45°), and profile (±90°) angles,
with elevation values fixed at 0° or 45° as defined in
our rendering setup (see Figure 1 and Table B.1). For
each viewpoint, a virtual camera was positioned, and
the resulting image Rk was saved using a subject- and
view-specific filename.
To localize facial content and suppress background
artifacts,
we
applied
the
YOLOv8-Face-Detection
model to each projection (Rk). YOLOv8 is a realtime object detection architecture that leverages a
Month 2021
Publication Title
3

THEME/FEATURE/DEPARTMENT
0
500
1000
1500
Sample Count
Anger
Disgust
Fear
Happy
Sadness
Surprise
Neutral
a) Emotion
71
69
70
106
66
71
299
426
414
420
636
396
426
1794
233
237
239
372
240
250
1041
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
Sample Count
Combined Au
Lower Face Au
Upper Face Au
b) Action Unit
169
1549
432
1014
9294
2592
592
5545
1511
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Sample Count
Cross Rotation
Pitch Rotation
Yaw Rotation
c) Pose
211
419
735
1266
2514
4410
606
1346
1826
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Sample Count
Eye
Glasses
Hair
Mouth
d) Occlusion
105
104
67
105
630
624
402
630
341
353
165
280
Original
CRBP_Raw
CRBP_YOLOv8
FIGURE 2. Distribution of samples across (a) emotions, (b) action units, (c) head poses, and (d) occlusions, comparing original,
CRBP-Raw, and CRBP-YOLOv8.
decoupled head with anchor-free detection, to achieve
precise localization of small and varied-scale facial regions. For our task, we used a variant fine-tuned specifically for facial bounding box prediction, pretrained on
large-scale datasets such as WIDER-Face [8].
For each rendered projection Rk, the detector outputs a set of bounding boxes B = {bl}, where each box
bl = (xl, yl, wl, hl, sl) encodes the top-left coordinate
(xl, yl), width wl, height hl, and associated confidence
score sl ∈[0, 1]. We selected the bounding box with
the highest confidence score as the most probable face
detection:
b∗= arg max
bl∈B sl.
(2)
To maintain spatial consistency across samples, we
applied non-maximum suppression (NMS) with an IoU
threshold of 0.5 prior to selection. We retained only
detections with sl > 0.5 to ensure robustness. The
selected bounding box (b∗) was then used to crop the
image Rk, resulting in the refined facial projection R′
k.
The refined facial views emphasize on key biometric regions (eyes, nose, mouth) and reduce variability introduced by background clutter or pose-induced
padding. The processed outputs were organized into
two subsets: CRBP-Raw which contained the original
full-scene renderings (Rk), and CRBP-YOLOv8, which
contained the face-localized crops (R′
k). All images
were saved in lossless PNG format and arranged in
a directory hierarchy indexed by subject ID and view
label.
To ensure dataset integrity, automated scripts verified that each subject had the complete set of six
views, with consistent filenames and formatting. In
addition, a stratified sample of refined projections was
visually inspected to validate bounding box accuracy,
facial alignment, and identity preservation under pose
variation. The pipeline also incorporated exception
handling routines that logged missing, corrupted, or
unprocessable assets to avoid pipeline interruptions.
Algorithm 1 presents the multi-step generation of
the CRBP dataset. This pipeline reconstructs threedimensional meshes, generates photometrically normalized projections from canonical views, and employs
YOLOv8-based detection to isolate facial content. The
output includes both raw and refined 2.5D facial projections, which are organized for subsequent training
and assessment in image-based models.
This sequential pipeline guarantees spatial consistency, photometric uniformity, and facial focus across
all projections, which are essential for developing robust, pose-aware facial analysis models. This pipeline
generated a pose-diverse, photometrically normalized
dataset of 2.5D facial views, with precise facial localization. The CRBP dataset supports pose-robust,
occlusion-aware facial analysis in a CNN-ready image
format.
DATASET STATISTICS AND
ANALYSIS
Figure 2 demonstrates a steady decrease in image
count across all categories after YOLOv8 processing.
In the Emotion category (Figure 2a), “Neutral” samples
decrease from 1794 to 1041, indicating missed low-
4
Publication Title
Month 2021

THEME/FEATURE/DEPARTMENT
intensity expressions. The effect is particularly noticeable in the Pose category (Figure 2c), with the “Yaw
Rotation” class experiencing a significant decline from
4410 to 1826. This indicates that YOLOv8 encounters
difficulties with extreme side profiles, where essential
facial features may be partially covered or distorted,
thereby diminishing detection confidence. In the Action
Unit (AU) categories (Figure 2b), significant reductions
are observed in the "Lower Face AU" group, likely
attributable to the more subtle movements in the mouth
region failing to satisfy YOLOv8’s detection criteria. In
the Occlusion category (Figure 2d), samples impacted
by hair and mouth are significantly underrepresented
in the CRBP_YOLOv8 subset. This likely indicates the
model prefers clear, unobstructed facial areas. The
observed trends indicate that YOLOv8 enhances alignment and visual clarity; however, it also introduces a
detection bias that favors frontal or minimally occluded
faces. This approach enhances tasks such as emotion
recognition and biometric identification in controlled
environments; however, it limits diversity in pose and
occlusion. Consequently, CRBP-Raw is better suitable
for applications that require large view coverage and
real-world variability. Figure 3 illustrates the dataset’s
expressive and geometric variability across key annotation categories.
CRBP-Yolov8 demonstrated superior and more
consistent performance across classes, achieving a
balanced accuracy of 84.7% and an MCC of 0.859,
compared to 81.4% and 0.827 for CRBP-Raw5 by employing EfficientNet-B0 (5M). Additional visualizations
and performance comparisons are provided in the supplementary material (Appendix A, Figures A.1–A.7).
These further validate the advantages and limitations
of the CRBP-YOLOv8 subset.
CONCLUSION
This study presents the Colour-Rendered Bosphorus
Projections (CRBP) Face Dataset, aimed at integrating
3D facial geometry with deep learning frameworks via
structured, photometrically consistent 2.5D projections.
CRBP generates six canonical views per subject using
mean-colour rendering, where each mesh is shaded
with the average RGB of the subject’s texture map, together with mesh-based shading. YOLOv8-based face
detection refines each image to reduce background
noise and align facial content. The dataset includes
two formats, namely, CRBP-Raw and CRBP-YOLOv8,
5https://github.com/sahil301290/CRBP-3D-to-
2.5D/blob/main/02_CRBP_Raw_vs_YOLOv8_EfficientNetb0.ipynb
Algorithm 1 CRBP Data Generation Pipeline with
subject-specific mean-colour rendering and YOLOv8based face localisation
Input: Bosphorus dataset (‘*.bnt‘, ‘*.png‘), camera
viewpoints V
Output:
CRBP-Raw
(full-scene)
and
CRBP-
YOLOv8 (cropped) projections
1: Initialize YOLOv8-Face-Detection with pretrained
weights, set threshold τ = 0.5
2: for all subjects do
3:
for all depth–texture pairs do
4:
Reconstruct mesh (V, F) from depth map
5:
Compute mean texture colour µnorm and
apply uniformly to mesh faces
6:
for all viewpoints (θk, ϕk) ∈V do
7:
Render shaded mesh M = (V, F, µnorm)
→image Rk
8:
Save Rk in CRBP-Raw
9:
Detect faces B in Rk with YOLOv8
10:
Apply NMS, keep boxes with sl > τ
11:
if B ̸= ∅then
12:
Select highest-confidence box b∗
13:
Crop and resize Rk using b∗→R′
k
14:
Save R′
k in CRBP-YOLOv8
15:
else
16:
Log missing detection for Rk
17:
end if
18:
end for
19:
end for
20: end for
Post-processing: Verify six views per subject; log
or discard incomplete cases
to support controlled evaluation of preprocessing impacts. The results reveal that YOLOv8 improves alignment and model performance while introducing bias,
especially under extreme pose or occlusion scenarios.
EfficientNet-B0 achieves 84.7% balanced accuracy on
CRBP-YOLOv8, outperforming the 81.4% from CRBP-
Raw, demonstrating the value of refined facial focus.
However, this results in less data diversity. CRBP
supports emotion recognition, biometric authentication,
and avatar creation.
Beyond benchmarking, CRBP has several practical
uses. Facial expression recognition is a reliable method
for screening generalised anxiety disorder in healthcare [9] and dementia/Parkinson’s therapy [10]. Realtime student engagement monitoring in digital classrooms is possible with facial affect recognition [11].
Multimodal techniques such as 3D facial structure and
expression signals enhance biometric authentication
for security [12]. With ready-to-use, photometrically
Month 2021
Publication Title
5

THEME/FEATURE/DEPARTMENT
Anger
Disgust
Fear
Sadness
Surprise
Happy
Neutral
Combined AU
Upper Face AU
Lower Face AU
Yaw Rotation
Pitch Rotation
Cross Rotation
Eye
Mouth
Glasses
Hair
a) Emotion
b) Action Unit
d) Occlusion
c) Pose
FIGURE 3. Representative CRBP samples across (a) emotions, (b) action units, (c) poses, and (d) occlusions, showing
expressive and geometric diversity.
consistent 2.5D projections, CRBP simplifies crossdomain applications. Future work aims to increase
demographic diversity and incorporate 4D sequences
for better longitudinal and affective facial modelling.
Supplementary Material
The supplementary file includes Appendix A (Figures A.1–A.7: qualitative and quantitative examples)
and Appendix B (Table B.1: camera viewpoints used
for CRBP rendering).
REFERENCES
1. L. Yin, X. Wei, Y. Sun, J. Wang, and M. J. Rosato, “A
3d facial expression database for facial behavior research,” in 7th International Conference on Automatic
Face and Gesture Recognition (FGR06).
IEEE,
2006, pp. 211–216.
2. S. Gupta, K. Patil, and A. Gupta, “Texas 3d face
recognition database,” in 2010 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition Workshops.
IEEE, 2010, pp. 1–6.
3. A. Savran, N. Alyüz, H. Dibeklio˘glu, O. Çeliktutan,
B. Gökberk, B. Sankur, and L. Akarun, “Bosphorus
database for 3d face analysis,” in Biometrics and
Identity Management.
Springer, 2008, pp. 47–56.
4. P. Phillips, P. Flynn, T. Scruggs, K. Bowyer, J. Chang,
K. Hoffman, J. Marques, J. Min, and W. Worek,
“Overview of the face recognition grand challenge,” in
2005 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR’05),
vol. 1, 2005, pp. 947–954.
5. S. Sanyal, T. Bolkart, H. Feng, and M. J. Black,
“Learning to regress 3d face shape and expression
from an image without 3d supervision,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, 2019, pp. 7763–7772.
6. G. Jocher, J. Qiu, and A. Chaurasia, “Ultralytics
yolo,” Ultralytics, 2023, available at https://github.
com/ultralytics/ultralytics.
7. H. Gouraud, “Continuous shading of curved surfaces,” in Seminal Graphics: Pioneering efforts that
shaped the field, 1998, pp. 87–93.
8. S. Yang, P. Luo, C.-C. Loy, and X. Tang, “Wider
face: A face detection benchmark,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 2016, pp. 5525–5533.
9. X. Ren, S. Su, W. Jiang, Y. Wang, J. Yao, Y. Su,
Y. Wu, J. Tao, Y. Peng, and J. Qiu, “Reliability and validity of facial expression recognition in the screening
of generalized anxiety disorder,” Journal of Affective
Disorders, vol. 369, pp. 538–546, 2025.
10. S.
Yoonesi,
R.
Abedi
Azar,
M.
Arab
Bafrani,
S. Yaghmayee, H. Shahavand, M. Mirmazloumi,
N. Moazeni Limoudehi, M. Rahmani, S. Hasany,
F. Z. Idjadi et al., “Facial expression deep learning
algorithms in the detection of neurological disorders:
a systematic review and meta-analysis,” BioMedical
Engineering OnLine, vol. 24, no. 1, p. 64, 2025.
11. F. R. T. Ferreira, L. M. do Couto, G. de Melo Baptista Domingues, and C. M. Saporetti, “Development
of a framework using deep learning for the identification and classification of engagement levels in
distance learning students,” Social Network Analysis
and Mining, vol. 15, no. 1, p. 37, 2025.
12. L. Pedrouzo-Rodriguez, P. Delgado-DeRobles, L. F.
Gomez, R. Tolosana, R. Vera-Rodriguez, A. Morales,
and J. Fierrez, “Is it really you? exploring biometric verification scenarios in photorealistic talkinghead avatar videos,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.00748,
2025.
6
Publication Title
Month 2021
