NRC Publications Archive
Archives des publications du CNRC
Facial expressions as a nexus for health assessment
Sooriyaarachchi, Jinani; Jiang, Di
This publication could be one of several versions: author’s original, accepted manuscript or the publisher’s version. /
La version de cette publication peut être l’une des suivantes : la version prépublication de l’auteur, la version
acceptée du manuscrit ou la version de l’éditeur.
For the publisher’s version, please access the DOI link below./ Pour consulter la version de l’éditeur, utilisez le lien
DOI ci-dessous.
Publisher’s version  /   Version de l'éditeur:
https://doi.org/10.3390/bioengineering13020208
Bioengineering, 13, 2, pp. 1-17, 2026-02-11
NRC Publications Archive Record / Notice des Archives des publications du CNRC :
https://nrc-publications.canada.ca/eng/view/object/?id=3a7097e2-eb0c-46c7-9371-fd3563b0584c
https://publications-cnrc.canada.ca/fra/voir/objet/?id=3a7097e2-eb0c-46c7-9371-fd3563b0584c
Access and use of this website and the material on it  are subject to the Terms and Conditions set forth at
https://nrc-publications.canada.ca/eng/copyright
READ THESE TERMS AND CONDITIONS CAREFULLY BEFORE USING THIS WEBSITE.
L’accès à ce site Web et l’utilisation de son contenu sont assujettis aux conditions présentées dans le site
https://publications-cnrc.canada.ca/fra/droits
LISEZ CES CONDITIONS ATTENTIVEMENT AVANT D’UTILISER CE SITE WEB.
Questions? Contact the NRC Publications Archive team at
PublicationsArchive-ArchivesPublications@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca. If you wish to email the authors directly, please see the
first page of the publication for their contact information.
Vous avez des questions? Nous pouvons vous aider. Pour communiquer directement avec un auteur, consultez
la première page de la revue dans laquelle son article a été publié afin de trouver ses coordonnées. Si vous
n’arrivez pas à les repérer, communiquez avec nous à PublicationsArchive-ArchivesPublications@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca.

Academic Editor: Larbi Boubchir
Received: 6 January 2026
Revised: 4 February 2026
Accepted: 10 February 2026
Published: 12 February 2026
Copyright: © 2026 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license.
Review
Facial Expressions as a Nexus for Health Assessment
Jinani Sooriyaarachchi *
and Di Jiang
Medical Devices Research Centre, National Research Council of Canada, Boucherville, QC J4B 6Y4, Canada
* Correspondence: jinani.sooriyaarachchi@cnrc-nrc.gc.ca
Abstract
Facial expressions are crucial in conveying emotions and for engaging in social interactions.
The facial musculature activations and their pattern of movements under emotions are
similar in all humans; hence, facial expressions are considered a behavioral phenotype.
Facial features related to the expression of various emotions change under different health
impairments, including cognitive decline and pain experience. Hence, evaluating these
facial expression deviations in comparison to healthy baseline conditions can help in the
early detection of health impairments. Recent advances in machine learning and computer
vision have introduced a multitude of tools for extracting human facial features, and researchers have explored the application of these tools in early screening and detection of
different health conditions. Advances in these studies can especially help in telemedicine
applications and in remote patient monitoring, potentially reducing the current excessive
demand on the healthcare system. In addition, once developed, these technologies can assist healthcare professionals in emergency room triage, early diagnosis, and treatment. The
aim of the present review is to discuss the available tools that can objectively measure facial
features and to record the studies that use these tools in various health assessments. Our
findings indicate that analyzing facial expressions for the detection of multiple health impairments is indeed feasible. However, for these technologies to achieve reliable real-world
deployment, they must incorporate disease-specific facial features and address existing
limitations, including concerns related to patient privacy.
Keywords: computer vision; facial expressions; remote biosensing; health assessment; pain;
cognitive impairments
1. Introduction
As social creatures, humans engage in a multitude of daily interactions and communications through the exchange of information. Facial expressions play a pivotal role
in sending and receiving messages during these interactions, and are evoked by specific
facial muscle movements to act as powerful non-verbal cues in communication, such as
non-verbal emotions. Face-to-face interactions occur from the beginning of existence between parents and infants and are important for parents to evaluate the affective state of
their infants, whose verbal communication channels have not yet developed [1]. Often,
observing the entire face is not necessary to understand the emotions conveyed through
facial expressions; individual facial regions are adequate to detect emotions, for example,
sad or angry eyes and a happy mouth [2].
Facial expressions can be controlled voluntarily. The communicator can suppress or
conceal the actual emotion to show a different emotion, or involuntary expressions, which
can reveal the genuine emotion in the form of subtle micro-expressions [3]. Studies suggest
Bioengineering 2026, 13, 208
https://doi.org/10.3390/bioengineering13020208

Bioengineering 2026, 13, 208
2 of 17
that facial expressions are a behavioral phenotype, which, under similar circumstances,
activate the same facial muscles and facial movements [4]. This universal similarity of facial
expressions has contributed vastly to social intelligence and efficient social interactions.
However, the expression, perception, and interpretation of facial expressions can be altered
under various disease conditions. Therefore, tracking these facial expression deviations
from the baseline conditions can be used as an objective tool in health assessment, especially
in conditions where the patient loses the ability to verbally convey the disease or the pain
associated with it.
This review focuses on the feasibility and current research on the use of facial expression cues and facial features in different health assessments. Although previous reviews
have reported facial expression-based studies related to a specific disease condition [5–8],
to the best of our knowledge, this is the first review article that carries out a cross-condition
comparison. This present review summarizes several widely used tools available for assessing facial expression frequencies and their magnitudes, discusses a broad range of
applications of monitoring facial expressions across several health impairments, and finally,
evaluates the advantages and limitations of this approach. Furthermore, based on existing
research, we highlight the need for condition-specific facial expression-based detection
models that incorporate disease-specific activation of facial features.
2. Tools for Objective Measurement of Facial Expressions
2.1. Facial Action Coding System (FACS)
Originally developed by psychologists Paul Ekman and Wallace Friesen in 1978 [9], the
Facial Action Coding System (FACS) identifies a standard set of facial muscle movements
corresponding to different facial expressions. FACS combines the activation and relaxation
of 46 facial muscles known as action units (AUs) to objectively measure the changes in
facial expressions. For example, AU6 and AU12, respectively, represent the activation of
Orbicularis oculi (check raiser) and Zygomatic Major (lip corner puller) facial muscles,
both of which are activated in happiness and joy. Alternatively, the combined activation of
the levator labii superioris alaquae nasi (nose wrinkler), depressor anguli oris (lip corner
depressor), and depressor labii inferioris (lower lip depressor) muscles is associated with
facial expression displaying disgust. In FACS, the activation intensity of AUs is indicated
using a scale between 0 (complete relaxation) and 5 (complete activation).
Due to its objective facial expression measurement capabilities and the capability
of supporting high temporal resolution facial videos, which allows the study of subtle
micro-expressions, FACS is widely used in fields such as human–computer interaction
and psychology to analyze human behavior, social interactions, and evoked emotions
in response to triggers and stimuli. Although in the past the accuracy of FACS was
dependent on training experienced FACS coders and their inter-individual perceptual
differences, modern machine learning-based automated FACS tools such as OpenFace [10],
Py-Feat [11], Noldus FaceReader [12], and Affdex [13] provide efficient measurements of
AU activations and their intensities and facial expressions without manual intervention.
However, the predictive performance of these automated tools can vary based on multiple
factors, including pose, occlusion, and face angle [14]. Therefore, it is important to consider
the performance, as well as licensing constraints and validation contexts, when choosing
these tools in future research.
2.2. Facial Electromyography (EMG)
Facial electromyography (EMG) provides an objective method to record the activity
of facial muscles with a high temporal resolution and sensitivity; therefore, it is capable
of capturing the slightest muscle contractions that might not be visible to the naked eye.
https://doi.org/10.3390/bioengineering13020208

Bioengineering 2026, 13, 208
3 of 17
The discovery of EMG is a result of the consecutive work of multiple neurophysiologists,
from the concept of animal electricity (i.e., animal muscle contractions due to electrical
stimulations) in 1771 to the invention of techniques to amplify bio-electrical signals at the
beginning of the 20th century [15]. EMG activity, which can be recorded using surface
electrodes, consists of the electrical signals related to muscle fiber depolarizations that
evoke action potentials, causing muscle contractions [16]. Relaxation and contraction of
facial muscles during different facial expressions can, therefore, be captured using facial
surface EMG electrodes.
Despite many advantages of facial EMG, it carries several limitations, including the
requirement of specialized equipment for data collection, higher inter-subject signal variability, and the electrode placements visually obscuring the face, making it less applicable in
social contexts. However, the use of EMG to analyze facial expressions and emotions dates
back to the 1970s. Based on recorded facial EMG activity from corrugator and zygomaticus
muscle sites, researchers were able to differentiate and quantify the intensity of happy
and sad emotions imagined by human subjects [17,18]. Recently, studies in EMG-based
emotion recognition applying machine learning techniques with facial EMG features have
achieved higher accuracies in distinguishing between multiple emotions [19,20]. Hence, the
latest models of virtual reality headsets have started integrating EMG sensors for emotion
detection during VR simulations [21].
2.3. Computer-Vision-Based Techniques
Computer vision, a branch of artificial intelligence and computer science that trains
computers to understand and derive meaningful information from visual data inputs,
including images and videos, has shown ground-breaking advances in recent years. It has
introduced several techniques, including Face Mesh and Histogram of Oriented Gradients
(HOG), that are used to extract facial features. Face mesh represents the three-dimensional
geometry of the face, consisting of a collection of interconnected points arranged in a meshlike pattern and interconnected vertices to approximate the shape of the face [22]. Recent
advances in computer vision and machine learning have introduced several software tools
to automatically extract the face mesh using images and videos, for example, MediaPipe,
which computes a face mesh consisting of 478 vertices located on the key points on the
human face [23]. Tracking the face mesh can be used to capture facial expressions [24]
without capturing personal identity, thus protecting human privacy.
Histogram of Oriented Gradients (HOG) has been widely used to detect objects in
computer vision applications [25]. It computes the gradient in small cells of an image,
providing a compact representation of an object. Hence, HOG can be used to model the
shape of facial muscles using edge analysis. HOG features have been effectively used in
multiple facial expression recognition studies along with machine learning techniques [26].
HOG descriptors are capable of extracting features without being affected by illumination
changes, proving this technique to be an added value. Various automated software tools are
available to compute HOG, including OpenFace [10], which also simultaneously computes
other facial features, including AUs, facial landmarks, head pose, and gaze tracking.
3. Facial Expressions in Health Assessment
For this narrative review, we conducted a literature search in the PubMed and Google
Scholar databases (accessed July–August 2025) using a keyword-based approach (e.g., facial
expressions, facial features, health detection). We included articles published after 1990,
related to human facial expressions, and the articles that clearly described the deviations in
facial expressions/features associated with different health conditions, as well as studies
https://doi.org/10.3390/bioengineering13020208

Bioengineering 2026, 13, 208
4 of 17
that used these deviations in the detection of the related health condition. These studies
will be discussed below.
Various health impairments, including cognitive decline, pain experience, stroke, inflammation, migraines, and non-psychotic disorders, can cause deviations in the facial
expressions of patients compared to healthy controls. Hence, recent years have witnessed
an increasing interest and advancements in medical assessments using the aforementioned
techniques and tools, especially in the initial screening phase and in remote settings, including telemedicine applications. Multiple studies have focused on the application of facial
expressions and facial features-based technologies for the early detection of various health
conditions. These will be discussed below in three main application sections: 1. detection
of cognitive impairments, 2. detection of pain, and 3. detection of other health conditions.
3.1. Facial Expressions in Cognitive Impairments
Cognitive impairments, which can be mild or severe, affect a person’s cognitive
abilities and daily functioning, such as thinking, memory, learning, and decision making.
This has become a common condition among older adults. For example, in Canada, over
770,000 individuals were living with Alzheimer’s disease (AD) or other forms of dementia
in 2025, and it is projected to reach 1.7 million by 2050. Dementia is a clinical diagnosis
represented by the basis of progressive cognitive decline, and it can occur due to different
pathophysiological processes, including AD (50–75%), vascular dementia (20%), dementia
with Lewy bodies (5%), and frontotemporal lobar dementia (5%) [27]. AD, which is the
most prevalent type of dementia, is named after the German psychiatrist Alois Alzheimer,
who observed a massive loss of neurons in the cerebral cortex of his patient suffering
from memory loss [28]. The state between normal aging and dementia, known as mild
cognitive impairment (MCI), progresses to dementia at an annual rate between 8 And 15%
and subsequently to AD [29]. Therefore, early screening for cognitive decline has become
increasingly important.
Conventional cognitive screening methods, such as brain scans (CT, MRI, PET), are
used widely to study early structural and metabolic changes in multiple brain areas, including the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, and gray matter in the medial temporal
lobe [30]. However, brain imaging tends to be resource-intensive, costly, and stressful for
patients. Apart from brain scans, there exist multiple psychiatric tests to conduct cognitive
assessment, such as the Mini-Mental Status Exam (MMSE) or Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA). MMSE measures five areas of cognitive function, including orientation,
registration, attention and calculation, recall, and language [31]. In comparison, MoCA
covers more domains, including visuospatial skills, attention, language, abstract reasoning,
delayed recall, executive function, and orientation, with a higher specificity and sensitivity [32]. However, these tests have statistical limitations; for example, they might not be
strong enough to detect mild cognitive decline and might have a ceiling effect with high
IQ patients [33]. Therefore, developing efficient and accessible alternatives to cognitive
assessment is crucial.
The study of facial expression deviations during cognitive decline has emerged as
an interesting technique for cognitive impairment detection. Previous research in this
field can be broadly divided into two main areas: (1) exploratory studies that examine
changes in facial expressions among cognitively impaired patients compared to healthy
individuals, and (2) studies that assess facial expressions and features as a detection tool
for distinguishing cognitively impaired patients from healthy controls.
https://doi.org/10.3390/bioengineering13020208

Bioengineering 2026, 13, 208
5 of 17
3.1.1. Exploratory Studies
There is a vast majority of research studying the facial expressions of cognitively
impaired patients dating back to the 1990s. Asplund et al. (1991). who studied the ability of
facial expression exhibition in four Alzheimer’s type dementia patients using FACS, found
that these patients show decreased complex facial expressions associated with emotions
under pleasant and unpleasant stimulus conditions [34]. This phenomenon, known as
hypomimia (i.e., reduced facial expressions and facial cues), was reported in subsequent
studies of severely demented patients using FACS, with facial videos recorded during
caregiving activities [35]. A separate study with AD patients and Parkinson’s disease (PD)
patients videotaped during neutral and posed facial emotions assessed using MDS-UPDRS
3.2 score (scale for facial expression ranging from score 0 (“normal facial mimic”) to score 4
(“Fixed facial expressions with lips open most of the time when the mouth is still”)) [36]
showed similar patterns of reduced facial expressions in AD and PD compared to healthy
controls [37].
Contrary to the concept of hypomimia in cognitive impairments, Seidl et al. (2012)
showed that cognitive deficits are associated with an increased rate of total facial expressions. This was observed in recorded facial videos of AD patients, analyzed using emotional
FACS (EMFACS) after controlling for apathy, in response to emotion-eliciting or neutral
images [38]. A study conducted with dementia of Alzheimer’s type showed an increase
in facial expressions associated with negative affect in reaction to sad vignette stimuli
compared to the control group. These facial videos were also scored for facial expressions
using the FACS [39]. Additionally, a facial EMG signal-based study conducted with AD
subjects observed inverted patterns of zygomatic activity in comparison to healthy controls
in response to emotion-eliciting images [40].
The aforementioned studies demonstrated that no consensus has been achieved that
AD or dementia patients universally show reduced or increased facial expressions. Instead,
the literature suggests a spectrum of changes. For some individuals in some contexts,
they may show reduced emotional expressivity or flattened affect, and others may show
increased facial expressions, which can be caused by various pathological reasons, such as
less control over facial muscles, disinhibition, or emotional dysregulation, especially under
stress, pain, or negative emotional stimuli.
3.1.2. Detection Tools
Differences in facial expressions discovered in the aforementioned exploratory studies
between cognitively impaired patients and healthy subjects are used in detection studies to
distinctly identify cognitive impairments. Various studies have been conducted to perform
such classifications of cognitively impaired patients and healthy controls using facial
features, with psychiatric test scores used as ground truth (Table 1). These studies have
focused on detecting AD, MCI, and dementia patient groups classified based on MMSE,
MoCA, and other cognitive tests. Based on extracted facial features or complete facial
images in facial videos classified with machine learning techniques, these studies reported
higher predictive performances, demonstrating the feasibility of using facial expressions in
the automated screening of cognitive impairments.
Table 1. Studies using facial expressions in detecting cognitive impairments.
Citation
Subject Population (Data
Collection Setting)
Facial Features
Ground Truth
Classification Method
(Validation Method)
Prediction
Performance
Tanaka et al.,
2019 [41]
12 dementia, 12 healthy
subjects (human–agent
integration videos)
Two-dimensional
facial landmarks, face
pose, gaze angles,
AUs, lip movements
MMSE
L1 regularized logistic
regression
(cross-validation)
AUC of ROC 0.82
https://doi.org/10.3390/bioengineering13020208

Bioengineering 2026, 13, 208
6 of 17
Table 1. Cont.
Citation
Subject Population (Data
Collection Setting)
Facial Features
Ground Truth
Classification Method
(Validation Method)
Prediction
Performance
Umeda-
Kameyama et al.,
2021 [42]
121 CI, 117 healthy subjects
(front-on portrait images of
participants/no stimuli)
Facial images
MMSE
Multiple Deep learning
models (e.g., Xception,
SENet50, ResNet50,
VGG16) (cross validation)
Accuracy 92.56%
AUC of ROC
0.9717
Jiang et al.,
2022 [43]
256 CI, 237 healthy subjects
(passive viewing
memory test)
Facial images
MoCA
CNN framework
proposed in Jiang et al.,
2021 [44]
(cross-validation)
AUC of ROC 0.609
Fei et al., 2022 [45]
36 CI, 25 healthy subjects
(under evoked emotions
with video stimuli)
Frames from
facial videos
MoCA
DNN (MobileNet and
SVM) (cross-validation)
Accuracy 73.3%
Zheng et al.,
2023 [46]
117 total subjects (CI and
healthy subjects) (patient
video during interviews)
AUs, Face
mesh, HOG
MMSE
Deep learning-based
system (SVM, LSTM)
(cross-validation)
Accuracy with AUs
71%,
Face mesh 66%,
HOG 79%
Alsuhaibani et al.,
2024 [47]
68 total subjects (MCI and
healthy subjects)
(video-recorded
conversations at home)
Facial images from
facial videos
Clinical
diagnosis
Deep learning-based
framework
(cross-validation)
Accuracy 88%
Sun et al., 2024 [48]
100 MCI, 89 healthy subjects
(video chats from controlled
behavioral intervention)
Facial video clips
Clinical
diagnosis
Transformer-based
framework
(cross-validation)
Accuracy 90.63%
Takeshige-Amano
et al., 2024 [49]
93 AD, 99 healthy subjects
(natural conversations
with a chatbot)
Smile, face
orientation,
eye opening,
and blink indices
MMSE,
MoCA
Multiple Machine
learning classifiers (e.g.,
Random Forest, logistic
regression)
(cross-validation)
Accuracy 0.72
(with Random
Forest classifier)
Okunishi et al.,
2025 [50]
110 MCI, 144 Dementia,
161 healthy subjects (patient
video during interviews)
AUs, emotion
categories,
Valence-Arousal,
face embeddings
MMSE
Decision tree-based
model (Light GBM)
(cross-validation)
AUC of ROC
dementia: 0.933,
MCI: 0.889
CI: Cognitive impaired.
3.1.3. Limitations
Although the above-listed studies report higher accuracies in detecting cognitive impairments, several limitations remain. One common limitation across all the studies is that
they have used cross-validation with the same dataset; hence, they lack external validation.
For example, the aforementioned studies primarily used data from participants from a
specific ethnicity, but have not explored the generalizability of the reported accuracies to
other ethnicities. Future research should employ multiple diverse datasets for training
and testing to better assess model generalizability.
Additionally, it is required to evaluate the clinical reference of the reported models
and their accuracy. While modern ML models are efficient in model performance, their feature explainability is often limited. Therefore, it would be necessary to develop explainable
ML models that can clearly depict the clinical relevance of their significant features in the
detection of cognitive impairments. This can help medical professionals gain insights into
understanding the underlying features driving the models’ performance and enhance trust
in their clinical applicability.
3.2. Facial Expressions in Pain Assessment
Pain is an unpleasant sensory and subjective emotional experience associated with
actual or potential tissue or nerve damage, where individuals feel pain in different ways,
even if the sources of pain are the same [51]. Depending on the duration and frequency
of pain, it can take three primary patterns: (1) short duration ‘acute pain’, which can start
and end suddenly; (2) ‘episodic pain’, which can occur time to time with regular or irregular
intervals; and (3) ‘chronic pain’, which can last for more than three months. Additionally,
pain is categorized based on its source: (1) ‘nociceptive pain’, caused by tissue damage or
https://doi.org/10.3390/bioengineering13020208

Bioengineering 2026, 13, 208
7 of 17
inflammation; (2) ‘neuropathic pain’, caused by nerve damage due to injury or disease;
and (3) ‘nociplastic pain’, which describes the pain caused by changes in how the nervous
system processes pain [52,53].
Due to its subjective nature in perception among individuals, self-reporting is considered the primary method of pain assessment [54]. These include the verbal rating scale
(VRS), where subjects verbally rate their pain on a scale, the visual analog scale (VAS),
where subjects mark their pain on a 100 mm visual scale [55], and the faces scale for reporting pain in children [56]. Despite its popularity and consideration as the ‘gold standard’ in
pain assessment, these subjectively reported scales carry several limitations, including their
lesser feasibility in cognitively impaired, unconscious, and non-verbal subjects. Therefore,
objective measurements of pain have become important.
Multiple behavioral changes occur during pain experiences, including posture
changes [57], vocalizations [58], and facial expression changes [59]. Pain evokes a ‘universal facial expression’ where a consistent set of facial AUs is activated across different
painful stimuli [60]. Due to the observed changes in facial expressions during pain experiences, several studies have attempted to detect pain in subjects by studying their facial
expressions. These studies are reported below (Table 2), with varying accuracies using
ML-based techniques for pain detection and pain intensity estimation. One outcome from
these research works is the introduction of a Prkachin and Solomon pain intensity score
(PSPI). PSPI is based on a linear additive scoring of four AUs, i.e., brow lowering (AU04),
orbit tightening (AU06 and AU07), upper-lip raising/nose wrinkling (AU9 and AU10),
and eye closing (AU43) [61]. However, depending on the tool used for the detection of
these AU activations (manual or automatic tools), when computing PSPI, it can produce
inconsistencies in repeatability; hence, it could have limited applicability in clinical settings.
Table 2. Studies using facial expressions in detecting pain and estimating pain intensities.
Citation
Subject Population
Facial Features
Ground Truth
Classification Method
(Validation Method)
Prediction Performance
Lucey et al., 2011 [62]
25 subjects with
shoulder pain 1
Facial video frames (active
appearance model
(AAM)-based system for
feature extraction)
PSPI
SVM (pain vs. no-pain)
(cross-validation)
Accuracy 80.9%
Rathee, Ganotra, 2015 [63]
25 subjects with
shoulder pain 1
Facial video frames
PSPI
Distance Metric
Learning (DML) + SVM
for 16-level pain
intensity classification
(Cross-validation)
Accuracy 96%
Rathee, Ganotra, 2016 [64]
25 subjects with
shoulder pain 1
Facial video frames
(extracted Gabor, HOG,
and local binary pattern
features)
PSPI
Multiview DML + SVM
for pain detection and
4-level pain intensity
classification
(cross-validation)
Accuracy for
Pain detection: 89.59%
Pain intensity: 75%
Bargshdy et al., 2020a [65]
25 subjects with
shoulder pain 1
Facial video frames
PSPI
Deep learning-based
framework for 4-level
pain intensity
classification
(cross-validation)
Accuracy 85%
Bargshdy et al., 2020c [66]
25 subjects with
shoulder pain 1,
20 subjects with
electrically evoked pain 2
Facial video frames in Hue,
Saturation, Value (HSV)
color space
PSPI and
stimuli-based
pain scale
Temporal CNN for
4-level pain intensity
classification for Dataset
1 and 5-level pain
intensity for Dataset2
(cross-validation)
Accuracy for Dataset1:
94.14%
Dataset2: 89%
Bargshdy et al., 2020b [67]
25 subjects with
shoulder pain 1,
20 subjects with
electrically evoked pain 2
Facial video frames
PSPI and
stimuli-based
pain scale
CNN-RNN for 5-level
pain intensity
classification for Dataset
1 and 5-level pain
intensity for Dataset2
(cross-validation)
Accuracy for Dataset1:
86%
Dataset2: 92.26%
https://doi.org/10.3390/bioengineering13020208

Bioengineering 2026, 13, 208
8 of 17
Table 2. Cont.
Citation
Subject Population
Facial Features
Ground Truth
Classification Method
(Validation Method)
Prediction Performance
Casti et al., 2021 [68]
25 subjects with
shoulder pain 1
Facial video frames
VAS
Linear discriminant
analysis (LDA) for pain
detection (VAS > 0 vs.
VAS = 0) and Pain
intensity (VAS)
estimation
(cross-validation)
Accuracy for
Pain detection AUC 0.87
Pain intensity estimation
MAE 2.44
Barua et al., 2022 [69]
129 subjects with
shoulder pain 1
Facial video frames
(shutter blinds-based deep
feature extraction)
PSPI
kNN for 4-level pain
intensity classification
(cross-validation)
Accuracy 95.57%
Rodriguez et al., 2022 [70]
25 subjects with
shoulder pain 1
Facial video frames
PSPI
CNN-LSTM-based
method for pain
detection and 6-level
pain intensity estimation
(cross-validation)
Accuracy of pain
detection: 83.1%
pain intensity estimation:
MAE 0.5
Fontaine et al., 2022 [71]
1189 patients before and
after surgery
Facial images and AUs
NRS
CNN-based pain
intensity estimation for
facial images and SVM
for AUs (external
test dataset)
Accuracy CNN 53%
SVM 27.7%
Alghamdi, Alaghband,
2022 [72]
25 subjects with
shoulder pain 1 (24 for
model development, 1
for unseen test data)
Facial video frames
PSPI
Transfer learning-based
approach (inceptionV3
with SGD optimizer) for
4-level pain intensity
classification
(cross-validation
and 1 unseen subject)
Accuracy 90.56% on
unseen subject data;
99.10% on 10-fold CV
Alphonse et al., 2024 [73]
25 subjects with
shoulder pain 1
Facial video frames
(Statistical Frei-Chen Mask
(SFCM)-based features and
DenseNet-based features)
PSPI
Radial Basis
Function-Based Extreme
Learning Machine
(RBF-ELM) classifier for
4-level pain intensity
estimation
(cross-validation)
Accuracy for
pain intensity
estimation 98.58%
Tan et al., 2025 [74]
200 patients undergoing
surgery or interventional
pain procedures
(160 subjects for training,
40 for validation)
Facial video frames
NRS
Spatial-temporal
attention long short-term
memory (STA-LSTM)
deep learning network
for 3-level pain intensity
(40 unseen subjects
for validation)
Accuracy 86.6%
Datasets: 1 UNBC–McMaster database [75] contains videos of the faces of adult subjects with a rotator cuff
and other shoulder injuries. The subjects were recorded during the movement of their affected and unaffected
shoulders during active (where the subject moves the arm himself) and passive (where the subject’s arm is moved
by a physiotherapist) conditions. 2 MIntPAIN database [76], which was captured by giving electrical muscle pain
stimulation to the subjects.
The majority of the above work on pain detection and pain intensity estimation
has used the publicly available UNBC–McMaster database, which contains self-reported
shoulder pain data, and the MIntPAIN database, which includes subjects experiencing
evoked pain using electrical stimulation. Although most of these studies focused on
cognitively intact patients capable of self-reporting their pain, several studies involving
cognitively impaired patients have shown that their facial expressions reflect pain as
effectively as, or even more clearly than, those of healthy controls [77,78]. These findings
support the feasibility of automated objective pain assessment using facial expressions in
healthy subjects as well as in cognitively impaired individuals. Consistent with this concept,
a recent study has developed a commercial application called ‘PainCheck’ [79], which uses
deep learning methods (i.e., automated facial recognition and analysis) to identify facial
micro-expressions for the detection of the presence of pain, particularly aiming for pain
assessment in people living with dementia.
3.2.1. Limitations
Similarly to the studies reported on the detection of cognitive impairments using facial
expressions (Table 1), the majority of the studies on pain reported above (Table 2) have
used cross-validation within the same dataset to measure the performance, thus lacking
generalizability. In contrast, Fontaine et al. (2022) [71] have reported their accuracy on an
https://doi.org/10.3390/bioengineering13020208

Bioengineering 2026, 13, 208
9 of 17
external dataset, while Alghamdi and Alaghband (2022) [72] and Tan et al. (2025) [74] have
reported their accuracy on test data from unseen subjects. However, the majority of the
studies have used data from two publicly available datasets with limited homogeneous
subjects; therefore, further attention should be paid to potential inflation of the reported
accuracies and the risk of over-fitting. Hence, the robustness of the reported accuracies
should be evaluated with additional diverse datasets. Additionally, it would be necessary
to develop explainable ML models, which can clearly demonstrate the relevance of the
significant ML model features with clinical interpretability.
3.2.2. Studies on Evaluating the Genuineness of Pain Expression
Apart from the above-reported studies focusing on pain vs. no-pain detection, there
are a few studies focused on detecting genuine and fake pain using facial expressions.
One such study, conducted with healthy subjects in which pain was evoked using a coldpressure task (CPT), reported an accuracy of 85% in distinguishing genuine from fake pain
using a support vector machine (SVM) classifier, compared to only 55% accuracy achieved
by trained human observers [80]. In another similar study involving 26 participants
undergoing pain evoked with CPT, a machine learning based classifier achieved an accuracy
of 88% based on extracted AU facial features, whereas human performance reached only
49% accuracy [81]. These studies demonstrate the capabilities of machine learning-based
methods in outperforming humans in fake vs. genuine pain detection and in overall pain
intensity estimation.
3.3. Facial Expressions in Other Health Assessments
Beyond the changes in facial expressions associated with cognitive decline and pain
perception, we also identified studies indicating that various other health conditions can
also evoke measurable alterations in facial expressions in subjects compared to baseline
conditions. These include chest pain and cardiac diseases, stroke, non-psychotic mental disorders, migraine, and infections, and they will be discussed below under different sections.
3.3.1. Chest Pain and Cardiac Diseases
Chest pain can result from life-threatening events such as a myocardial infarction.
Efficient and early detection of chest pain is therefore critical, as it can reduce the risk
of severe or potentially fatal outcomes. Dalton et al. (1999), focused on discovering the
facial expressions exhibited by 278 patients admitted to the emergency department with
chest pain who were given a possible diagnosis of acute ischemic heart disease (AIHD). By
analyzing the videotapes using FACS, they identified four AUs (lowering the brow (AU04),
parting the lips (AU25), pressing the lips (AU24), and turning the head left (AU51)) that
showed significant association with positive creatine kinase (CK) enzyme levels, a known
biomarker and predictor of acute AIHD [82]. Another study conducted in an emergency
department with 50 patients presenting with dyspnoea and chest pain, classified into
disease+ (patients with serious diseases diagnosed with cardiopulmonary diagnosis) and
disease- (patients who were well on telephone follow-up with no serious diagnosis) groups,
found that disease+ group exhibited lower facial expression variability and surprise effect
compared to the disease- group, when the stimuli-evoked facial expressions were analyzed
with FACS scores [83].
A recent study adopted deep learning models (YOLO) with higher accuracies (80–100%)
to carry out real-time identification of chest pain conditions to assist the clinician–patient
consultations and to reduce the extent of cardiac damage in patients. The study was carried
out with data taken from videos of 1000 patients experiencing chest pain symptoms, and the
reported accuracies are on a hold-back test dataset, which was 15% of the full dataset [84].
A recent study by Khedkar, R. et al. (2024), further confirmed the feasibility of using facial
https://doi.org/10.3390/bioengineering13020208

Bioengineering 2026, 13, 208
10 of 17
features in detecting cardiac diseases. The researchers demonstrated that a machine learningbased model was able to achieve an accuracy of 88% (for the test dataset) in predicting real-time
coronary artery heart disease (CAD) through facial features extracted from facial images with
characteristics commonly associated with CAD. They used 200 facial photographs, each from
individuals diagnosed with CAD and an equal number from individuals without known
cardiac conditions [85].
3.3.2. Stroke
Stroke is a medical emergency that requires prompt detection and treatment to reduce
the damage to brain cells. It occurs when blood flow to part of the brain is interrupted
(ischemic) or when a blood vessel ruptures (hemorrhagic). Facial expression changes are
among the most visible and important signs during a stroke, such as drooping of the face
on one side. Therefore, tracking the changes in facial features is an important method to
detect the onset of a stroke.
Several studies have explored an automated approach focusing on these characteristics.
Focusing on the facial expressional asymmetry and mouth skew of stroke patients, a
previous study proposed the use of asymmetry indices (area ratio and distance ratio
between the left and right side of the eye and mouth) to classify stroke patients with higher
accuracies (with a total of 69 images for training and testing; Accuracies: 100% with SVM,
95.45% with Random Forest and 100% with Bayes) [86]. A similar study calculated facial
features such as wrinkles on the forehead area, eye movement, mouth drooping, and cheek
line detection to identify early symptoms of stroke using a testing dataset of 100 images
and achieved an accuracy of 91% [87]. Since these higher accuracies are reported with only
a limited number of facial images, further research is required to explore the generalizability
of these proposed models.
With 3050 face images from stroke patients and normal people (75% for training
and 25% for testing), Mohamed et al. (2025) reported an accuracy of 98.43% in detecting
stroke patients. They carried out face detection using the YOLO8 model, followed by facial
feature extraction and feature selection using active appearance model (AAM) and binary
booby bird optimization (B3O), and finally a Naive Bayes (NB) classifier to detect stroke
patients [88]. Another study involving 185 patients with acute ischemic stroke and 551 age
and sex matched healthy controls reported an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.91 for stroke
recognition based on facial images using an ensemble convolutional neural network (CNN)
based model [89]. These studies demonstrated the applicability and feasibility of the facial
expression-based approach for stroke detection.
3.3.3. Non-Psychotic Mental Disorders
Non-psychotic mental disorders, which are typically less severe than psychotic disorders, affect an individual’s emotions and behavior without causing psychosis, such as
delusions or hallucinations. Some examples are depression, Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder (OCD), Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), and Borderline Personality Disorder (BPD).
Overall, multiple studies have shown that individuals with non-psychotic disorders exhibit
attenuated facial expressions in response to emotional or sensory stimuli [90].
OCD, which is characterized by recurrent thoughts or obsessions and compulsive
activities, is often underdiagnosed regardless of its worldwide spread [91]. A study conducted with 10 OCD patients and 10 healthy controls by using FACS to analyze emotional
expression in response to film clips showed reduced congruent emotional expression in the
OCD group compared to healthy controls [92]. Similar results were observed in a study
with both OCD and mild OCD patients in comparison to healthy controls [93]. Depression is
another example of non-psychotic disorders characterized by persistent feelings of sadness
https://doi.org/10.3390/bioengineering13020208

Bioengineering 2026, 13, 208
11 of 17
and reduced interest. Consequently, the expression of positive emotions is often impaired
in depressed patients. This has been demonstrated in studies that used emotional stimuli,
such as pictures or film clips, and were analyzed using EMFACS. These studies consistently
reported reduced positive expressions in terms of both frequency and intensity [94,95]. Similarly, BPD patients exhibited reduced positive expressions and also diminished negative
expressions compared to healthy controls when analyzed with EMFACS in response to film
clips [94]. In ASD patients, reduced positive and negative dynamic expressions were also
observed in response to film clips analyzed using FACS [96]. Collectively, these findings
highlight that individuals with non-psychotic disorders display impaired emotional expression in response to stimuli, suggesting potential applications for these facial markers in
both detection and diagnostic evaluation of such disorders.
3.3.4. Migraine
Migraine, characterized by recurrent painful headaches, globally affects more than
one billion people. A recent study analyzed changes in facial activity in individuals with
migraine under calm and resting conditions using camera-based recordings. The study
included 46 healthy subjects, 174 patients with episodic migraine (EM), and 84 patients with
chronic migraine (CM). They found that the lid-tightener action unit was a reliable indicator
of headache intensity [97], denoting the potential of facial feature-based approaches for
migraine detection.
3.3.5. Infections
Although the human immune system has evolved to adapt to the threats of infections,
the probability of being infected is still high and can potentially cause serious complications; hence, the early detection of infections is important. Using an experimental model
of sickness with 22 volunteers intravenously injected with either endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide; 2 ng/kg body weight) or placebo, a study found that the faces of subjects injected
with endotoxin (after two hours of the injection) were perceived as more sick and less
healthy. They also expressed more negative emotions (sadness and disgust) and less happiness and surprise, demonstrating the feasibility of using emotional expressions to detect
infectious individuals [98].
3.4. Overall Comparison of Facial Expressions in Aforementioned Health Assessments
Facial expressions were found to deviate from healthy baselines in all of the aforementioned conditions. However, these deviations were specific to each assessed health
condition. More specifically, some previous work reports that the expressions of emotions
were reduced, leading to hypomimia, while others report the specific increase in the expression of negative affect in cognitive impairments. In comparison, condition-specific
activations of facial muscles (AUs) were strongly associated with pain perception, stroke,
migraine, and CAD, demonstrating the importance of analyzing individual muscle activation rather than interpreting the emotions conveyed by the face as a whole. In contrast,
using facial expressions in the initial detection of non-psychotic disorders is less feasible, as condition-specific external stimuli are often required to elicit the facial expression
deviations in these patients.
Hence, facial feature-based models that emphasize the disease-specific feature activations should be developed in the detection of the aforementioned health conditions, rather
than relying on a generic facial expression-based analysis.
4. Discussion
In the present review, we have explored various facial expression analysis tools
and their applicability in health assessment. As discussed in the above sections, facial
https://doi.org/10.3390/bioengineering13020208

Bioengineering 2026, 13, 208
12 of 17
expressions can be used in screening and detection of several health conditions, including
cognitive impairments, pain assessment, stroke, migraine, and a multitude of other disorders. With the current advancements in computer vision and machine learning techniques,
automated facial expression analysis has become efficient and fast in computation [99];
therefore, the applicability of this technique in healthcare settings has become extremely
feasible. In addition to the computation efficiency, automated facial expression-based health
monitoring carries several advantages due to its non-invasive nature. Unlike traditional
brain scans or blood tests, which can be costly, resource-consuming, and overwhelming for
patients, these techniques utilize facial video data and extracted facial features, which can
be easily captured during routine interactions and interviews with healthcare professionals.
Most studies discussed in this review have used facial images or videos in controlled,
optimum conditions; however, they have not evaluated the challenges in the real-world
deployment of the introduced models. For example, in practice, lighting conditions, background complexity, and image and camera quality can affect the performance and accuracy
of facial expression-based health assessment. Therefore, extended research should be conducted to evaluate the performance under diverse backgrounds and facial video quality
settings. Additionally, extra steps should be employed to protect the patient’s privacy in
recorded facial images and videos.
Another common drawback of these current studies lies in the selection of the ground
truth parameter used to train the computational models. For example, studies related to
cognitive decline have used psychiatric tests as ground truth, which themselves can carry
several limitations (e.g., they are not strong enough to detect mild cognitive conditions and
have a ceiling effect with high IQ patients). Pain assessment studies have used self-reported
pain scores as the ground truth, which are subjective. Hence, the selection of more objective
parameters as the reference in model development can significantly improve the objective
health assessment nature of the studies. These could include vital signs (e.g., heart rate,
blood pressure, etc.) and brain signals (e.g., EEG) that can potentially co-vary with facial
expression changes in different health conditions. Therefore, incorporating further improvements in the proposed technologies can ensure their accuracy, usability, and efficiency
in applying them in healthcare settings as an assisting tool for healthcare professionals.
From a clinical perspective, longitudinal assessment of health conditions is important.
Therefore, evaluating the proposed models for their accuracy and compatibility in long-term
patient monitoring over time would bring value to this technology. Additionally, since vital
signals and other bio-signals are continuously monitored in the majority of clinical settings,
it would be interesting to explore the expandability of proposed technologies to include
multimodal fusion architectures. This could bring more disease-specific as well as patientspecific information to the facial expression-based technology and potentially improve
the prediction reliability and accuracy. In the long term, it is important to identify the
limitations and challenges of applying these technologies in hospital settings and in remote
patient monitoring. These include navigating the regulatory pathways, obtaining medical
certifications required for integration into existing clinical workflows, and conducting
comparisons with established standard benchmarks. Most importantly, attention should
be paid to safeguarding patient privacy when using facial videos (high privacy risk due
to direct identification) and processed facial features (relatively low privacy risk). These
include secure data storage practices, as well as controlling access rights to data.
All the discussed research work in the present article is tested with only subject groups
of a homogenous ethnicity. However, it has been shown that facial emotion expressivity
can change based on demographics, including gender [100,101], race, and age groups [102].
Therefore, to develop robust facial expression-based health assessment technologies, it is
important to expand the studies by incorporating participants from different demographics.
https://doi.org/10.3390/bioengineering13020208

Bioengineering 2026, 13, 208
13 of 17
In addition, recent studies have shown the capabilities in capturing and recognizing facial
micro-expressions in facial videos [103,104]. However, further research is required to
evaluate the capabilities of capturing facial micro movements in clinical contexts when
expanding these studies into real-world clinical settings.
Overall, the technologies developed in the studies reviewed here can be integrated
into the existing healthcare system to assist healthcare professionals in making accurate and
objective assessments of health conditions (with additional improvements to address the
limitations in real-world deployment). Most importantly, this approach can be deployed in
telemedicine applications to serve patients in remote areas with limited access to healthcare
services and professionals. The real-world value of these technologies lies in their capabilities for early health screening in both onsite and remote settings, thereby enhancing
the quality of care for individuals while helping to alleviate the growing demand on the
current healthcare system.
5. Conclusions
In this review, we examined the application of facial expression analysis for detecting various health conditions, including cognitive impairments, pain, stroke, migraine,
and several other disorders. Our findings indicate that each condition produces distinct
deviations in facial features; therefore, disease-specific facial feature models that emphasize
condition-relevant feature activations are necessary, rather than relying on generic facial
expression-based analyses. Although the majority of studies reviewed report high accuracy
in detecting different health conditions, several limitations remain. These include concerns
related to patient privacy when using facial videos or images, challenges associated with
meeting clinical standards for integration into existing workflows, and issues related to
camera and image quality during clinical deployment. With appropriate improvements
to address these limitations, facial expression-based technologies for disease detection
can be deployed in both remote and onsite settings to enable objective health assessment.
Once refined, these technologies have the potential to assist healthcare professionals with
emergency triage, early diagnosis, and treatment planning, thereby helping to reduce the
current excessive demand on healthcare systems.
Author Contributions: J.S.: Conceptualization, Project administration, Validation, Writing—original
draft, Writing—review and editing. D.J.: Conceptualization, Project administration, Supervision,
Writing—review and editing.
All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
the manuscript.
Funding: The authors declare that financial support was received for the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article from the National Research Council of Canada Postdoctoral Fellowship Program.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: No new data were created or analyzed in this study.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
References
1.
Rosenstein, D.; Oster, H. Differential facial responses to four basic tastes in newborns. Child. Dev. 1988, 59, 1555–1568. [CrossRef]
2.
Beaudry, O.; Roy-Charland, A.; Perron, M.; Cormier, I.; Tapp, R. Featural processing in recognition of emotional facial expressions.
Cogn. Emot. 2014, 28, 416–432. [CrossRef]
3.
Klingner, C.M.; Guntinas-Lichius, O. Facial expression and emotion. Laryngorhinootologie 2023, 102, S115–S125.
4.
Schmidt, K.L.; Cohn, J.F. Human facial expressions as adaptations: Evolutionary questions in facial expression research. Am. J.
Phys. Anthropol. 2001, 116, 3–24. [CrossRef]
https://doi.org/10.3390/bioengineering13020208

Bioengineering 2026, 13, 208
14 of 17
5.
Jiang, D.; Yan, L.; Mayrand, F. Emotion expressions and cognitive impairments in the elderly: Review of the contactless detection
approach. Front. Digit. Health 2024, 6, 1335289. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.
Fei, Z.; Yang, E.; Li, D.D.U.; Butler, S.; Ijomah, W.; Zhou, H. A survey on computer vision techniques for detecting facial features
towards the early diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment in the elderly. Syst. Sci. Control Eng. 2019, 7, 252–263. [CrossRef]
7.
Cramer, I.C.; Cox, E.G.M.; de Kok, J.W.T.M.; Koeze, J.; Visser, M.; Bouma, H.R.; De Bie Dekker, A.; van der Horst, I.C.C.; Bouwman,
R.A.; van Bussel, B.C.T. Quantification of facial cues for acute illness: A systematic scoping review. Intensive Care Med. Exp.
2025, 13, 17. [CrossRef]
8.
De Sario, G.D.; Haider, C.R.; Maita, K.C.; Torres-Guzman, R.A.; Emam, O.S.; Avila, F.R.; Garcia, J.P.; Borna, S.; McLeod, C.J.; Bruce,
C.J.; et al. Using AI to Detect Pain through Facial Expressions: A Review. Bioengineering 2023, 10, 548. [CrossRef]
9.
Ekman, P.; Friesen, W.V. Facial action coding system. Environ. Psychol. Nonverbal Behav. 1978. [CrossRef]
10.
Baltrusaitis, T.; Zadeh, A.; Lim, Y.C.; Morency, L.P. OpenFace 2.0: Facial Behavior Analysis Toolkit. In Proceedings of the 2018
13th IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face & Gesture Recognition (FG 2018), Xi’an, China, 15–19 May 2018.
11.
Cheong, J.H.; Jolly, E.; Xie, T.; Byrne, S.; Kenney, M.; Chang, L.J. Py-Feat: Python Facial Expression Analysis Toolbox. Affect. Sci.
2023, 4, 781–796. [CrossRef]
12.
Den Uyl, M.J.; van Kuilenburg, H. The FaceReader: Online facial expression recognition. In Proceedings of the Measuring
Behavior 2005, Wageningen, The Netherlands, 30 August–2 September 2005; pp. 589–590.
13.
Bishay, M.; Preston, K.; Strafuss, M.; Page, G.; Turcot, J.; Mavadati, M. Affdex 2.0: A real-time facial expression analysis toolkit. In
Proceedings of the 2023 IEEE 17th International Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition (FG), Waikoloa Beach,
HI, USA, 5–8 January 2023.
14.
Namba, S.; Sato, W.; Yoshikawa, S. Viewpoint Robustness of Automated Facial Action Unit Detection Systems. Appl. Sci.
2021, 11, 11171. [CrossRef]
15.
Kazamel, M.; Warren, P.P. History of electromyography and nerve conduction studies: A tribute to the founding fathers. J. Clin.
Neurosci. 2017, 43, 54–60. [CrossRef]
16.
Hof, A.L. EMG and muscle force: An introduction. Human. Mov. Sci. 1984, 3, 119–153. [CrossRef]
17.
Cacioppo, J.T.; Petty, R.E.; Losch, M.E.; Kim, H.S. Electromyographic activity over facial muscle regions can differentiate the
valence and intensity of affective reactions. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 1986, 50, 260–268. [CrossRef]
18.
Schwartz, G.E.; Fair, P.L.; Salt, P.; Mandel, M.R.; Klerman, G.L. Facial expression and imagery in depression: An electromyographic
study. Psychosom. Med. 1976, 38, 337–347. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19.
Kołodziej, M.; Majkowski, A.; Jurczak, M. Acquisition and Analysis of Facial Electromyographic Signals for Emotion Recognition.
Sensors 2024, 24, 4785. [CrossRef]
20.
Rutkowska, J.M.; Ghilardi, T.; Vacaru, S.V.; van Schaik, J.E.; Meyer, M.; Hunnius, S.; Oostenveld, R. Optimal processing of surface
facial EMG to identify emotional expressions: A data-driven approach. Behav. Res. Methods 2024, 56, 7331–7344. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
21.
Gjoreski, M.; Kiprijanovska, I.; Stankoski, S.; Mavridou, I.; Broulidakis, M.J.; Gjoreski, H.; Nduka, C. Facial EMG sensing for
monitoring affect using a wearable device. Sci. Rep. 2022, 12, 16876. [CrossRef]
22.
Kartynnik, Y.; Ablavatski, A.; Grishchenko, I.; Grundmann, M. Real-time Facial Surface Geometry from Monocular Video on
Mobile GPUs. arXiv 2019, arXiv:1907.06724. [CrossRef]
23.
Lugaresi, C.; Tang, J.; Nash, H.; McClanahan, C.; Uboweja, E.; Hays, M.; Zhang, F.; Chang, C.; Yong, M.G.; Lee, J.; et al. Mediapipe:
A framework for building perception pipelines. arXiv 2019, arXiv:1906.08172. [CrossRef]
24.
Ciraolo, D.; Fazio, M.; Calabrò, R.S.; Villari, M.; Celesti, A. Facial expression recognition based on emotional artificial intelligence
for tele-rehabilitation. Biomed. Signal Process. Control 2024, 92, 106096. [CrossRef]
25.
Dalal, N.; Triggs, B. Histograms of oriented gradients for human detection. In Proceedings of the 2005 IEEE Computer Society
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR’05), San Diego, CA, USA, 20–26 June 2005.
26.
Carcagnì, P.; Del Coco, M.; Leo, M.; Distante, C. Facial expression recognition and histograms of oriented gradients: A comprehensive study. SpringerPlus 2015, 4, 645. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27.
Cunningham, E.L.; McGuinness, B.; Herron, B.; Passmore, A.P. Dementia. Ulst. Med. J. 2015, 84, 79–87.
28.
Breijyeh, Z.; Karaman, R. Comprehensive Review on Alzheimer’s Disease: Causes and Treatment. Molecules 2020, 25, 5789.
[CrossRef]
29.
Petersen, R.C. Mild Cognitive Impairment. Continuum 2016, 22, 404–418. [CrossRef]
30.
Yin, C.; Li, S.; Zhao, W.; Feng, J. Brain imaging of mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease. Neural Regen. Res.
2013, 8, 435–444.
31.
Folstein, M.F.; Folstein, S.E.; McHugh, P.R. “Mini-mental state”: A practical method for grading the cognitive state of patients for
the clinician. J. Psychiatr. Res. 1975, 12, 189–198. [CrossRef]
https://doi.org/10.3390/bioengineering13020208

Bioengineering 2026, 13, 208
15 of 17
32.
Nasreddine, Z.S.; Phillips, N.A.; Bédirian, V.; Charbonneau, S.; Whitehead, V.; Collin, I.; Cummings, J.L.; Chertkow, H.
The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: A brief screening tool for mild cognitive impairment. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc.
2005, 53, 695–699. [CrossRef]
33.
Spencer, R.J.; Wendell, C.R.; Giggey, P.P.; Katzel, L.I.; Lefkowitz, D.M.; Siegel, E.L.; Waldstein, S.R. Psychometric limitations of the
mini-mental state examination among nondemented older adults: An evaluation of neurocognitive and magnetic resonance
imaging correlates. Exp. Aging Res. 2013, 39, 382–397. [CrossRef]
34.
Asplund, K.; Norberg, A.; Adolfsson, R.; Waxman, H.M. Facial expressions in severely demented patients—A stimulus–response
study of four patients with dementia of the Alzheimer type. Int. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry 1991, 6, 599–606. [CrossRef]
35.
Asplund, K.; Jansson, L.; Norberg, A. Facial expressions of patients with dementia: A comparison of two methods of interpretation.
Int. Psychogeriatr. 1995, 7, 527–534. [CrossRef]
36.
Goetz, C.G.; Tilley, B.C.; Shaftman, S.R.; Stebbins, G.T.; Fahn, S.; Martinez-Martin, P.; Poewe, W.; Sampaio, C.; Stern, M.B.; Dodel,
R.; et al. Movement Disorder Society-sponsored revision of the Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (MDS-UPDRS): Scale
presentation and clinimetric testing results. Mov. Disord. 2008, 23, 2129–2170. [CrossRef]
37.
Cannavacciuolo, A.; Paparella, G.; Salzillo, M.; Colella, D.; Canevelli, M.; Costa, D.; Birreci, D.; Angelini, L.; Guerra, A.; Ricciardi,
L.; et al. Facial emotion expressivity in patients with Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neural Transm. 2024, 131, 31–41.
[CrossRef]
38.
Seidl, U.; Lueken, U.; Thomann, P.A.; Kruse, A.; Schröder, J. Facial expression in Alzheimer’s disease: Impact of cognitive deficits
and neuropsychiatric symptoms. Am. J. Alzheimers Dis. Other Demen 2012, 27, 100–106. [CrossRef]
39.
Smith, M.C. Facial expression in mild dementia of the Alzheimer type. Behav. Neurol. 1995, 8, 149–156. [CrossRef]
40.
Burton, K.W.; Kaszniak, A.W. Emotional experience and facial expression in Alzheimer’s disease. Neuropsychol. Dev. Cogn. B
Aging Neuropsychol. Cogn. 2006, 13, 636–651. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41.
Tanaka, H.; Adachi, H.; Kazui, H.; Ikeda, M.; Kudo, T.; Nakamura, S. Detecting Dementia from Face in Human-Agent Interaction.
In Proceedings of the Adjunct of the 2019 International Conference on Multimodal Interaction, Suzhou, China, 14–18 October
2019; Association for Computing Machinery: Suzhou, China, 2019; p. 5.
42.
Umeda-Kameyama, Y.; Kameyama, M.; Tanaka, T.; Son, B.K.; Kojima, T.; Fukasawa, M.; Iizuka, T.; Ogawa, S.; Iijima, K.; Akishita,
M. Screening of Alzheimer’s disease by facial complexion using artificial intelligence. Aging 2021, 13, 1765–1772. [CrossRef]
43.
Jiang, Z.; Seyedi, S.; Haque, R.U.; Pongos, A.L.; Vickers, K.L.; Manzanares, C.M.; Lah, J.J.; Levey, A.I.; Clifford, G.D. Automated
analysis of facial emotions in subjects with cognitive impairment. PLoS ONE 2022, 17, e0262527. [CrossRef]
44.
Jiang, Z.; Harati, S.; Crowell, A.; Mayberg, H.S.; Nemati, S.; Clifford, G.D. Classifying Major Depressive Disorder and Response
to Deep Brain Stimulation Over Time by Analyzing Facial Expressions. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2021, 68, 664–672. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
45.
Fei, Z.; Yang, E.; Yu, L.; Li, X.; Zhou, H.; Zhou, W. A Novel deep neural network-based emotion analysis system for automatic
detection of mild cognitive impairment in the elderly. Neurocomputing 2022, 468, 306–316. [CrossRef]
46.
Zheng, C.; Bouazizi, M.; Ohtsuki, T.; Kitazawa, M.; Horigome, T.; Kishimoto, T. Detecting Dementia from Face-Related Features
with Automated Computational Methods. Bioengineering 2023, 10, 862. [CrossRef]
47.
Alsuhaibani, M.; Dodge, H.H.; Mahoor, M.H. Mild cognitive impairment detection from facial video interviews by applying
spatial-to-temporal attention module. Expert Syst. Appl. 2024, 252, 124185. [CrossRef]
48.
Sun, J.; Dodge, H.H.; Mahoor, M.H. MC-ViViT: Multi-branch Classifier-ViViT to detect Mild Cognitive Impairment in older adults
using facial videos. Expert Syst. Appl. 2024, 238, 121929. [CrossRef]
49.
Takeshige-Amano, H.; Oyama, G.; Ogawa, M.; Fusegi, K.; Kambe, T.; Shiina, K.; Ueno, S.I.; Okuzumi, A.; Hatano, T.; Motoi,
Y.; et al. Digital detection of Alzheimer’s disease using smiles and conversations with a chatbot. Sci. Rep. 2024, 14, 26309.
[CrossRef]
50.
Okunishi, T.; Zheng, C.; Bouazizi, M.; Ohtsuki, T.; Kitazawa, M.; Horigome, T.; Kishimoto, T. Dementia and MCI Detection Based on Comprehensive Facial Expression Analysis From Videos During Conversation. IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform.
2025, 29, 3537–3548. [CrossRef]
51.
Raja, S.N.; Carr, D.B.; Cohen, M.; Finnerup, N.B.; Flor, H.; Gibson, S.; Keefe, F.J.; Mogil, J.S.; Ringkamp, M.; Sluka, K.A.; et al.
The revised International Association for the Study of Pain definition of pain: Concepts, challenges, and compromises. Pain
2020, 161, 1976–1982. [CrossRef]
52.
Abd-Elsayed, A.; Deer, T.R. Different Types of Pain, in Pain: A Review Guide; Abd-Elsayed, A., Ed.; Springer International Publishing:
Cham, Switzerland, 2019; pp. 15–16.
53.
Nijs, J.; De Baets, L.; Hodges, P. Phenotyping nociceptive, neuropathic, and nociplastic pain: Who, how, & why? Braz. J. Phys.
Ther. 2023, 27, 100537. [CrossRef]
54.
Kang, Y.; Demiris, G. Self-report pain assessment tools for cognitively intact older adults: Integrative review. Int. J. Older People
Nurs. 2018, 13, e12170. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55.
Haefeli, M.; Elfering, A. Pain assessment. Eur. Spine J. 2006, 15, S17–S24. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
https://doi.org/10.3390/bioengineering13020208

Bioengineering 2026, 13, 208
16 of 17
56.
Tomlinson, D.; von Baeyer, C.L.; Stinson, J.N.; Sung, L. A systematic review of faces scales for the self-report of pain intensity in
children. Pediatrics 2010, 126, e1168–e1198. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57.
Walsh, J.; Eccleston, C.; Keogh, E. Pain communication through body posture: The development and validation of a stimulus set.
Pain 2014, 155, 2282–2290. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
58.
Helmer, L.M.L.; Weijenberg, R.A.F.; de Vries, R.; Achterberg, W.P.; Lautenbacher, S.; Sampson, E.L.; Lobbezoo, F. Crying out in
pain-A systematic review into the validity of vocalization as an indicator for pain. Eur. J. Pain 2020, 24, 1703–1715. [CrossRef]
59.
Prkachin, K.M. Assessing pain by facial expression: Facial expression as nexus. Pain Res. Manag. 2009, 14, 53–58. [CrossRef]
60.
Prkachin, K.M. The consistency of facial expressions of pain: A comparison across modalities. Pain 1992, 51, 297–306. [CrossRef]
61.
Prkachin, K.M.; Solomon, P.E. The structure, reliability and validity of pain expression: Evidence from patients with shoulder
pain. Pain 2008, 139, 267–274. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
62.
Lucey, P.; Cohn, J.F.; Matthews, I.; Lucey, S.; Sridharan, S.; Howlett, J.; Prkachin, K.M. Automatically Detecting Pain in Video
Through Facial Action Units. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. Part B (Cybern.) 2011, 41, 664–674. [CrossRef]
63.
Rathee, N.; Ganotra, D. A novel approach for pain intensity detection based on facial feature deformations. J. Vis. Commun. Image
Represent. 2015, 33, 247–254. [CrossRef]
64.
Rathee, N.; Ganotra, D. Multiview Distance Metric Learning on facial feature descriptors for automatic pain intensity detection.
Comput. Vis. Image Underst. 2016, 147, 77–86. [CrossRef]
65.
Bargshady, G.; Zhou, X.; Deo, R.C.; Soar, J.; Whittaker, F.; Wang, H. Enhanced deep learning algorithm development to detect
pain intensity from facial expression images. Expert Syst. Appl. 2020, 149, 113305. [CrossRef]
66.
Bargshady, G.; Zhou, X.; Deo, R.C.; Soar, J.; Whittaker, F.; Wang, H. The modeling of human facial pain intensity based on
Temporal Convolutional Networks trained with video frames in HSV color space. Appl. Soft Comput. 2020, 97, 106805. [CrossRef]
67.
Bargshady, G.; Zhou, X.; Deo, R.C.; Soar, J.; Whittaker, F.; Wang, H. Ensemble neural network approach detecting pain intensity
from facial expressions. Artif. Intell. Med. 2020, 109, 101954. [CrossRef]
68.
Casti, P.; Mencattini, A.; Filippi, J.; D’Orazio, M.; Comes, M.C.; Giuseppe, D.D.; Martinelli, E. Metrological Characterization of a
Pain Detection System Based on Transfer Entropy of Facial Landmarks. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 2021, 70, 1–8. [CrossRef]
69.
Barua, P.D.; Baygın, N.; Dogan, S.; Baygin, M.; Arunkumar, N.; Fujita, H.; Tuncer, T.; Tan, R.S.; Palmer, E.; Mokhzaini, A.; et al.
Automated detection of pain levels using deep feature extraction from shutter blinds-based dynamic-sized horizontal patches
with facial images. Sci. Rep. 2022, 12, 17297. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
70.
Rodriguez, P.; Cucurull, G.; Gonzalez, J.; Gonfaus, J.M.; Nasrollahi, K.; Moeslund, T.B.; Roca, F.X. Deep Pain: Exploiting Long
Short-Term Memory Networks for Facial Expression Classification. IEEE Trans. Cybern. 2022, 52, 3314–3324. [CrossRef]
71.
Fontaine, D.; Vielzeuf, V.; Genestier, P.; Limeux, P.; Santucci-Sivilotto, S.; Mory, E.; Darmon, N.; Lanteri-Minet, M.; Mokhtar,
M.; Laine, M.; et al. Artificial intelligence to evaluate postoperative pain based on facial expression recognition. Eur. J. Pain
2022, 26, 1282–1291. [CrossRef]
72.
Alghamdi, T.; Alaghband, G. Facial Expressions Based Automatic Pain Assessment System. Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 6423. [CrossRef]
73.
Alphonse, S.; Abinaya, S.; Kumar, N. Pain assessment from facial expression images utilizing Statistical Frei-Chen Mask
(SFCM)-based features and DenseNet. J. Cloud Comput. 2024, 13, 142. [CrossRef]
74.
Tan, C.W.; Du, T.; Teo, J.C.; Chan, D.X.H.; Kong, W.M.; Sng, B.L. Automated pain detection using facial expression in adult
patients with a customized spatial temporal attention long short-term memory (STA-LSTM) network. Sci. Rep. 2025, 15, 13429.
[CrossRef]
75.
Lucey, P.; Cohn, J.F.; Prkachin, K.M.; Solomon, P.E.; Matthews, I. Painful data: The UNBC-McMaster shoulder pain expression
archive database. In Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face & Gesture Recognition (FG), Santa
Barbara, CA, USA, 21–25 March 2011.
76.
Haque, M.A.; Bautista, R.B.; Noroozi, F.; Kulkarni, K.; Laursen, C.B.; Irani, R.; Bellantonio, M.; Escalera, S.; Anbarjafari, G.;
Nasrollahi, K.; et al. Deep Multimodal Pain Recognition: A Database and Comparison of Spatio-Temporal Visual Modalities. In
Proceedings of the 2018 13th IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face & Gesture Recognition (FG 2018), Xi’an, China,
15–19 May 2018.
77.
Chapman, C.R. Progress in pain assessment: The cognitively compromised patient. Curr. Opin. Anaesthesiol. 2008, 21, 610–615. [CrossRef]
78.
Kunz, M.; Crutzen-Braaksma, P.; Giménez-Llort, L.; Invitto, S.; Villani, G.; deTommaso, M.; Petrini, L.; Vase, L.; Tomczak
Matthiesen, S.; Gottrup, H.; et al. Observing Pain in Individuals with Cognitive Impairment: A Pilot Comparison Attempt across
Countries and across Different Types of Cognitive Impairment. Brain Sci. 2021, 11, 1455. [CrossRef]
79.
Atee, M.; Hoti, K.; Hughes, J.D. A Technical Note on the PainChek™System: A Web Portal and Mobile Medical Device for
Assessing Pain in People With Dementia. Front. Aging Neurosci. 2018, 10, 117. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
80.
Bartlett, M.S.; Littlewort, G.C.; Frank, M.G.; Lee, K. Automatic Decoding of Facial Movements Reveals Deceptive Pain Expressions.
Curr. Biol. 2014, 24, 738–743. [CrossRef]
81.
Littlewort, G.C.; Bartlett, M.S.; Lee, K. Automatic coding of facial expressions displayed during posed and genuine pain. Image
Vis. Comput. 2009, 27, 1797–1803. [CrossRef]
https://doi.org/10.3390/bioengineering13020208

Bioengineering 2026, 13, 208
17 of 17
82.
Dalton, J.A.; Brown, L.; Carlson, J.; McNutt, R.; Greer, S.M. An evaluation of facial expression displayed by patients with chest
pain. Heart Lung 1999, 28, 168–174. [CrossRef]
83.
Kline, J.A.; Neumann, D.; Haug, M.A.; Kammer, D.J.; Krabill, V.A. Decreased facial expression variability in patients with serious
cardiopulmonary disease in the emergency care setting. Emerg. Med. J. 2015, 32, 3–8. [CrossRef]
84.
Kao, H.; Wiryasaputra, R.; Liao, Y.Y.; Tsan, Y.T.; Chu, W.M.; Chen, Y.H.; Lin, T.C.; Yang, C.T. The Potential for High-Priority Care
Based on Pain Through Facial Expression Detection with Patients Experiencing Chest Pain. Diagnostics 2024, 15, 17. [CrossRef]
85.
Khedkar, R.; Jagtap, M.A.; Bhoje, N.V.; Patil, V.N. Coronary Artery Disease Prediction Using Facial Features. In Proceedings of the
2024 OPJU International Technology Conference (OTCON) on Smart Computing for Innovation and Advancement in Industry
4.0, Raigarh, India, 5–7 June 2024.
86.
Chang, C.Y.; Cheng, M.J.; Ma, M.H.M. Application of Machine Learning for Facial Stroke Detection. In Proceedings of the 2018
IEEE 23rd International Conference on Digital Signal Processing (DSP), Shanghai, China, 19–21 November 2018.
87.
Umirzakova, S.; Whangbo, T.K. Study on Detect Stroke Symptoms Using Face Features. In Proceedings of the 2018 International Conference on Information and Communication Technology Convergence (ICTC), Jeju Island, Republic of Korea,
17–19 October 2018.
88.
Mohamed, A.M.; Rabie, A.H.; Amer, H.M.; Saleh, A.I.; Abo-Elsoud, M.E. Real time brain stroke identification using face images
based on machine learning and booby bird optimization. Expert Syst. Appl. 2025, 282, 127719. [CrossRef]
89.
Wang, Y.; Ye, Y.; Shi, S.; Mao, K.; Zheng, H.; Chen, X.; Yan, H.; Lu, Y.; Zhou, Y.; Ye, W.; et al. Prediagnosis recognition of acute
ischemic stroke by artificial intelligence from facial images. Aging Cell 2024, 23, e14196. [CrossRef]
90.
Davies, H.; Wolz, I.; Leppanen, J.; Fernandez-Aranda, F.; Schmidt, U.; Tchanturia, K. Facial expression to emotional stimuli in
non-psychotic disorders: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 2016, 64, 252–271. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
91.
Singh, A.; Anjankar, V.P.; Sapkale, B. Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD): A Comprehensive Review of Diagnosis, Comorbidities, and Treatment Approaches. Cureus 2023, 15, e48960. [CrossRef]
92.
Bersani, G.; Bersani, F.S.; Valeriani, G.; Robiony, M.; Anastasia, A.; Colletti, C.; Liberati, D.; Capra, E.; Quartini, A.; Polli, E.
Comparison of facial expression in patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder and schizophrenia using the Facial Action
Coding System: A preliminary study. Neuropsychiatr. Dis. Treat. 2012, 8, 537–547. [CrossRef]
93.
Valeriani, G.; Bersani, F.S.; Liberati, D.; Polli, E.; Girolami, M.T.; Zullo, D.; Imperatori, C.; Melcore, C.; Tomassini, L.; Albano,
G.; et al. Generalized and specific emotion impairments as potential markers of severity in obsessive-Compulsive disorder: A
preliminary study using Facial Action Coding System (FACS). Psychiatr. Danub. 2015, 27, 159–167. [PubMed]
94.
Renneberg, B.; Heyn, K.; Gebhard, R.; Bachmann, S. Facial expression of emotions in borderline personality disorder and
depression. J. Behav. Ther. Exp. Psychiatry 2005, 36, 183–196. [CrossRef]
95.
Sloan, D.M.; Strauss, M.E.; Wisner, K.L. Diminished response to pleasant stimuli by depressed women. J. Abnorm. Psychol.
2001, 110, 488–493. [CrossRef]
96.
Yoshimura, S.; Sato, W.; Uono, S.; Toichi, M. Impaired Overt Facial Mimicry in Response to Dynamic Facial Expressions in
High-Functioning Autism Spectrum Disorders. J. Autism Dev. Disord. 2015, 45, 1318–1328. [CrossRef]
97.
Chen, W.T.; Hsiao, F.J.; Coppola, G.; Wang, S.J. Decoding pain through facial expressions: A study of patients with migraine. J.
Headache Pain 2024, 25, 33. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
98.
Sarolidou, G.; Axelsson, J.; Sundelin, T.; Lasselin, J.; Regenbogen, C.; Sorjonen, K.; Lundström, J.N.; Lekander, M.; Olsson, M.J.
Emotional expressions of the sick face. Brain Behav. Immun. 2019, 80, 286–291. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
99.
Kopalidis, T.; Solachidis, V.; Vretos, N.; Daras, P. Advances in Facial Expression Recognition: A Survey of Methods, Benchmarks,
Models, and Datasets. Information 2024, 15, 135. [CrossRef]
100. Thakur, N.; Cui, S.; Khanna, K.; Knieling, V.; Duggal, Y.N.; Shao, M. Investigation of the Gender-Specific Discourse about
Online Learning during COVID-19 on Twitter Using Sentiment Analysis, Subjectivity Analysis, and Toxicity Analysis. Computers
2023, 12, 221. [CrossRef]
101. Horrich, A.; Ertz, M.; Bekir, I. The effect of information adoption via social media on sustainable consumption intentions: The
moderating influence of gender. Curr. Psychol. 2024, 43, 16349–16362. [CrossRef]
102. Fan, Y.; Lam, J.C.K.; Li, V.O.K. Demographic effects on facial emotion expression: An interdisciplinary investigation of the facial
action units of happiness. Sci. Rep. 2021, 11, 5214. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
103. Buhari, A.M.; Ooi, C.P.; Baskaran, V.M.; Phan, R.C.W.; Wong, K.; Tan, W.H. FACS-Based Graph Features for Real-Time Micro-
Expression Recognition. J. Imaging 2020, 6, 130. [CrossRef] [PubMed] [PubMed Central]
104. Malik, P.; Singh, J.; Ali, F.; Sehra, S.S.; Kwak, D. Action unit based micro-expression recognition framework for driver emotional
state detection. Sci. Rep. 2025, 15, 27824. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
https://doi.org/10.3390/bioengineering13020208
