SPECIAL SECTION ON ADVANCED INFORMATION SENSING AND LEARNING
TECHNOLOGIES FOR DATA-CENTRIC SMART HEALTH APPLICATIONS
Received January 22, 2019, accepted February 9, 2019, date of publication February 18, 2019, date of current version March 8, 2019.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2900022
Algorithmic Bias in Clinical Populations—
Evaluating and Improving Facial
Analysis Technology in Older
Adults With Dementia
BABAK TAATI
1,2,3,4, (Member, IEEE), SHUN ZHAO1, AHMED B. ASHRAF1,6,
AZIN ASGARIAN1,2, M. ERIN BROWNE5, KENNETH M. PRKACHIN7, ALEX MIHAILIDIS1,3,8,
AND THOMAS HADJISTAVROPOULOS5,9
1Toronto Rehabilitation Institute, University Health Network, Toronto, ON M5G 2A2, Canada
2Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A1, Canada
3Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A1, Canada
4Vector Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Toronto, ON M5G 1M1, Canada
5Department of Psychology, University of Regina, Regina, SK S4S 0A2, Canada
6Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB R3T 5V6, Canada
7Department of Psychology, University of Northern British Columbia, Prince George, BC V2N 4Z9, Canada
8Department of Occupational Science and Occupational Therapy, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A1, Canada
9Centre on Aging and Health, University of Regina, Regina, SK S4S 0A2, Canada
Corresponding author: Babak Taati (babak.taati@uhn.ca)
This work was supported in part by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, by the AGE-WELL Network of National Centres of
Excellence, by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, and by the Toronto Rehabilitation
InstituteâĂŤUniversity Health Network.
ABSTRACT The need for the automated facial expression analysis arises in various clinical settings involv-
ing mental and physical health assessment of older adults. However, the effect of age (young versus old)
and ability (healthy versus physical or cognitive impairment) on the performance of available methods has
not yet been investigated. In this paper, we demonstrate a bias affecting the performance of common facial
landmark detection and expression recognition algorithms on the faces of older adults with dementia. We also
investigate the ways of mitigating this bias via the addition of representative training examples. Results show
that landmark placement is less accurate when tested on the faces of individuals with dementia as compared
to older adults who are cognitively healthy. Retraining or ﬁne-tuning the methods with images of older
adults’ faces improves the performance signiﬁcantly, but the gap between older adults with versus without
dementia persists. As the interest in using facial analysis methods in clinical applications grows, results
of this study: 1) highlight the limitations of the existing models when applied to clinical populations and
2) shed light on methods of addressing these limitations as well as the need to develop algorithms designed
to be fair with respect to variables such as age and ability.
INDEX TERMS Facial analysis, older adults, dementia, facial landmark detection, facial action units.
I. INTRODUCTION
A prerequisite for analysis of faces from videos and images
is the localization of key reference points describing facial
features (also known as facial landmarks). Example applica-
tions of facial landmark detection include expression recog-
nition, clinical assessment of depression, detection of pain
in non-communicative individuals, monitoring progression
of motor neuron disease, human computer interaction, and
The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and
approving it for publication was Qingxue Zhang.
alternative interfaces for differently abled persons, among
other applications. Recent resurgence of deep learning has
resulted in a number of new data-driven landmark detection
algorithms [1]–[5]. Every year, the proceedings of leading
conferences include new deep learning based facial landmark
detection methods with reports of ever improving perfor-
mance (e.g. [2]–[4]). However, the response of these algo-
rithms to variables such as age, gender, ethnicity, ability, and
health conditions affecting facial expression is often not part
of the analysis in these papers. This is partly because tradi-
tional face datasets often consist of young and healthy adults.
VOLUME 7, 2019
2169-3536 
 2019 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only.
Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
25527

B. Taati et al.: Algorithmic Bias in Clinical Populations
More importantly, the current work does not focus on devel-
oping algorithms that are explicitly designed to be fair with
respect to these variables.
Gender and ethnic origin have previously been shown
to affect the performance of facial analysis algorithms [6].
Typically, face recognition methods perform better for males
and for persons with lighter skin tones [6]. The difference in
performance (e.g. measured as the positive predictive value),
between a light-skinned male and a dark-skinned female is
shown to be in the range of 30-35 percentage points.
The need for automated facial expression analysis arises in
various clinical settings involving health assessment of older
adults. The effect of age and physical or cognitive health on
facial landmark detection and expression recognition algo-
rithms has not been investigated.
In this paper, we demonstrate the existence of algorithmic
bias in state-of-the-art facial landmark and expression recog-
nition methods, which affects the performance of these algo-
rithms for older adults with cognitive impairment. We present
a comparison of ﬁve methods with pre-trained landmark
detection models, and show that the performance drops for
people with dementia as compared to older adults who are
cognitively healthy. We also examined two facial action unit
detection algorithms with pre-trained models, and the perfor-
mance was poor for both groups in our test cohort.
One option to remedy observed biases could be to start
training new models speciﬁc to older adults using training
data only from clinical populations. However, collecting large
datasets from this segment is expensive and time consuming,
and this approach would not be fully utilizing the datasets
already available. To address this, we re-trained / ﬁne-tuned
two landmark placement models by augmenting examples of
older adult faces from people who were cognitively intact.
Performance improved signiﬁcantly, but the gap between
older adults with vs. without dementia persisted. Finally, we
retrained / ﬁne-tuned the models with various faces from the
dementia group. Using one of the algorithms, performance
improved by including more examples from people with
dementia in the training data.
Figure 1 presents the experimental ﬂowchart summariz-
ing these experiments and their results. The next section
(Section II) presents the details of our method, followed by
detailed results (Section III), discussion (Section IV), and
conclusions (Section V).
II. METHOD
A. PARTICIPANTS AND DATASET
Data from 86 older adult individuals with and without
dementia are analyzed in this study. This is a subset of
a full dataset of 102 participants [7], chosen based on
the availability of high quality front view images. Slightly
under half of the participants (42) had dementia and the
remainder (44) were cognitively intact older adults who were
living independently in the community. Table 1 summarizes
the demographic information of the participants. Details of
the protocol pertaining to this study are summarized here.
FIGURE 1. Experimental flowchart.
TABLE 1. Participant demographic information.
Participants with dementia were recruited from long-term
care facilities and were identiﬁed by facility health care staff.
The recruitment criteria for the cognitively healthy commu-
nity cohort was being age 65+, living independently in the
community, and attending a physiotherapy clinic. The study
was approved by the institutional review board at 3 institu-
tions (University of Regina, Toronto Rehabilitation Institute –
University Health Network, and University of Toronto) and
all participants – or substitute decision makers in cases of
severe dementia – provided informed written consent.
Each participant was video recorded during a baseline
state, and also as they underwent a standardized protocol of
movements designed to identify painful areas [9]. The entire
dataset was manually annotated by trained psychologists for
the level of pain expressed at each image frame. Two clini-
cally valid methods to score pain were used: one is a ﬁne-
grained observational approach based on the Facial Action
Coding System (FACS) [10], and the other is an easy-to-
use observational approach – the Pain Assessment Checklist
for Limited Ability to Communicate-II (PACSLAC-II) [11].
Both methods are clinically validated for scoring pain in
individuals with severe dementia who might have difﬁculties
with verbal communication [7].
The dataset used in this paper contains 688 frontal images
from the 86 older adults. Eight images from each person
were selected, such that in all images the face of the per-
son was fully visible from a front view. One image from
each person was selected at random from the baseline video.
25528
VOLUME 7, 2019

B. Taati et al.: Algorithmic Bias in Clinical Populations
Images from the painful protocol of each person were
clustered into 7 groups, based on the level of pain expressed,
and one frontal view image from each group was chosen at
random (conditioned only on image quality). This ensured
that for each person, different expressions corresponding to
various degrees of pain appeared in the dataset. When needed,
images were manually rotated to place the face in an upright
position.
In each of the 688 images, the locations of 68 standard
facial landmarks (on the eyes, eyebrows, nose, mouth, and
along the jawline) were manually marked by a coder blinded
to the dementia status. To measure inter-rater reliability,
a random subset of these images (61 images: 36 dementia,
26 healthy) was also annotated by a second coder, blinded to
the dementia status as well as the ﬁrst coder’s annotations.
B. FACIAL LANDMARK DETECTION
We compared the accuracy of different pre-trained landmark
detection models in faces of older adults with vs. without
dementia. The hypothesis behind this experiment is that the
performance of pre-trained models is worse (i.e. less accu-
rate and more failures) when tested on faces of older adults
with dementia, as compared to faces of older adults who are
cognitively intact.
We used ﬁve different landmark detection algorithms with
available code and pre-trained models. These include: active
appearance models (AAM) [12], as implemented in the
Menpo project [13], the face alignment network (FAN) [2]
(a deep convolutional neural network constructed by stacking
four hourglass networks [3], [14]), face alignment by coarse-
to-ﬁne shape searching (CFSS) [15], mnemonic descent
method (MDM) [1], and OpenFace [16] (another facial align-
ment library using deep neural networks).
The FAN model is capable of producing 2D or 3D facial
landmarks. Here, the 2D version is used. The 2D-FAN model
has obtained state-of-the-art results when tested on a number
of benchmarks [2]. The other four methods cover a variety
of facial landmark detection algorithms, ranging from the
classical AAM approach to newer deep learning based
models which previously reported state-of-the-art perfor-
mance on standard benchmarks. The ﬁve models are trained
on different training sets of various sizes (Table 2). As such,
the experiments cover a variety of approaches and training
dataset.
TABLE 2. Training sets used to train the pre-trained models.
We tested pre-trained models of these ﬁve methods on
the 688 images in our dataset. To ensure a fair comparison,
for each image, the same face bounding box (as detected by
the Dlib face detector [19]) was provided to all ﬁve algo-
rithms. Performance on the cognitively healthy older adult
subset (44 × 8 = 352 images) vs. the dementia subset
(42 × 8 = 336 images) was compared in terms of the
normalized root-mean-square error (NRMSE) and the Nor-
malized Mean Error (NME) [20] between the true (manually
annotated) and estimated landmark locations. The nonpara-
metric Wilcoxon rank-sum test was used to assess statistical
signiﬁcance. Both the NRMSE and NME are normalized by
the face size, deﬁned as the diagonal of the bounding box
of the face, as used in the FAN paper [2]. This normalization
factor is more robust with respect to out of plane rotations [21]
as compared to the interocular distance used in some other
work [22].
The relationship between landmark placement errors and
the age and gender of participants was also examined. For par-
ticipants with dementia, the relationship between landmark
placement errors and the Cognitive Performance Scale [8]
was also investigated.
C. FACIAL ACTION UNIT DETECTION
We used two pre-trained models to detect facial action units
on the same 688 images. The models were the OpenFace [16]
and the Affdex SDK (Affectiva Inc., Boston, USA) [23].
For this comparison, 2 facial action units (AUs) were man-
ually annotated on all 688 images and compared with the
pre-trained models across the two groups of healthy and
dementia faces. These were the AU4 (brow lowerer) and
AU43 (eyes closed). The choice of action units was based on
the FACS-based observational approach to assess pain [10].
The two action units selected are among the 6 used in esti-
mating observed pain via FACS coding. Our dataset con-
tains 8 images per person at various levels of observed pain.
As such, we expected to have a large variation in action units
used to calculate a pain score.
D. RETRAINING AND FINE-TUNING
To investigate how the augmentation of training data with
older faces inﬂuences the performance, the AAM and
FAN models were retrained / ﬁne-tuned with the images of
independent older adults.
While several effective transfer learning techniques are
available for AMM models [24], [25], such methods are
typically used when only a handful of training images from
the target domain are available, e.g. as low as 5 target training
images [24], [26]. In our case, with the availability of a
few hundred training images, it was possible to fully retrain
the AAM model from scratch. By contrast, deep learning
models require a very large training corpus and, as such,
ﬁne-tuning the pre-trained FAN model was the only viable
transfer learning option.
The AAM model was retrained using a combina-
tion of the older face images and the 300-W dataset.
VOLUME 7, 2019
25529

B. Taati et al.: Algorithmic Bias in Clinical Populations
To ﬁne-tune the FAN model, the pre-trained weights of the
ﬁrst three hourglass structures were frozen and the remain-
ing weights were ﬁne-tuned using the images of indepen-
dent older adults. When testing on the dementia subset,
all 8 × 42 healthy images were added to the training set for
both AAM and FAN. When testing on the healthy partici-
pants, 5-fold cross validation was used, with an additional
constraint that all 8 images from each participant belonged
to either the training or the testing set at each fold. The
nonparametric Wilcoxon signed rank test was used to com-
pare the difference between the pre-trained and the ﬁne-tuned
models. The Wilcoxon rank-sum test was used to compare the
difference between the dementia and independent groups.
Next, we repeated the same retraining / ﬁne-tuning process,
but images from a subset of the individuals with dementia
(D = 1, 3, 5, 10, 15, 20) were also added to the training set.
That is, the AAM and FAN models were retrained / ﬁne-tuned
with all the images of independent older adults (8 × 42 =
352), as well as with 8 × D images of people with dementia.
To ensure a fair and consistent comparison, all test results in
this experiment are reported on the same remaining 22 par-
ticipants with dementia. In doing so, the random subsets of
D individuals with dementia were always drawn from the
same 20 (= 42−20) people. For each value of D, 10 random
subsets were drawn, resulting in 10 models, and the average
and standard deviation of landmark placement errors were
calculated on the remaining 22 × 8 images.
III. RESULTS
A. INTER-RATER RELIABILITY
The NRMSE and NME between the two annotators were
2.8% ± 0.6% and 2.2% ± 0.5% respectively. Both the
NRMSE and NME were below 5% in all 61 images annotated
by the two coders.
B. FACIAL LANDMARK DETECTION
No signiﬁcant relationship was found between landmark
placement errors (NRMSE or NME, using any of the ﬁve
pre-trained models) and either age or gender of the partici-
pants. Similarly, within the dementia subgroup, the Cognitive
Performance Scale [8] was not signiﬁcantly correlated with
landmark placement errors.
The relationship between landmark placement errors and
dementia was signiﬁcant using every one of the ﬁve pre-
trained models. Table 3 compares the NRMSE (%) in the
dementia images vs. the independent controls. Table 4 com-
pares the NME (%) in the dementia images vs. the indepen-
dent controls. The z-statistic and the p-value of the Wilcoxon
rank-sum test are also presented.
Table 5 and Table 6 show the percentage of images in
which the NRMSE and NME were below 5% in each of the
dementia or independent subgroups.
C. RETRAINING AND FINE-TUNING
Table 7 presents the percentage of images in which NRMSE
and NME were below 5%, when using the FAN model
TABLE 3. Landmark placement NRMSE (%) in the dementia (D) vs.
the independent control (C) images. OF denotes OpenFace.
TABLE 4. Landmark placement NME (%) in the dementia (D) vs.
the independent control (C) images. OF denotes OpenFace.
TABLE 5. Percentage of images in which NRMSE was below 5%.
OF denotes OpenFace.
TABLE 6. Percentage of images in which NME was below 5%. OF denotes
OpenFace.
TABLE 7. Fine-tuning the FAN model with images from cognitively
healthy older adults.
ﬁne-tuned with images from independent older adults.
For easy comparison, the corresponding pre-trained num-
bers from Table 5 and Table 6 are reproduced. Fine-tuning
signiﬁcantly improved both NRMSE and NME in both the
25530
VOLUME 7, 2019

B. Taati et al.: Algorithmic Bias in Clinical Populations
FIGURE 2. Retraining the AAM model and fine-tuning the FAN model with
images from independent older adults and various numbers of older
adults with dementia.
FIGURE 3. Retraining the AAM model and fine-tuning the FAN model with
images from independent older adults and various numbers of older
adults with dementia.
dementia and the independent groups: using the Wilcoxon
signed rank test, all p-values were smaller than 10−5.
The difference between dementia and independent groups,
however,
remained
statistically
signiﬁcant
for
both
NRMSE (z = 7.7, p < 10−5∗) and NME (z = 7.3,
p < 10−5∗), using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test. The AAM
model retrained with the independent older adult images
showed a similar pattern (i.e. both NRMSE and NME
improved) but the statistically signiﬁcant gap between inde-
pendent and dementia groups persisted. For brevity, the table
is not included.
Figure 2 illustrates the percentage of images in which the
NRMSE for the retrained (AAM) and ﬁne-tuned (FAN) mod-
els were below 5% for various values of D; i.e. the number of
individuals with dementia in the training set. Figure 3 illus-
trates a similar plot, but with a 4% threshold on the NRMSE.
D. FACIAL ACTION UNITS
Table 8 presents the accuracy and the area under the receiver
operating characteristic curve (AUC) in predicting action
units AU4 and AU43 on all 688 images, using OpenFace and
Affdex SDK. No signiﬁcant difference was found between
the performances of either model on the dementia vs. the
independent subgroups. The confusion matrices in predicting
AU4 and AU43 are shown in Figure 4.
TABLE 8. Facial action unit detection.
FIGURE 4. Confusion matrices in predicting action units AU4 and
AU43 using OpenFace and Affdex SDK. (a) OpenFace. (b) Affdex SDK.
IV. DISCUSSION
When evaluating pre-trained landmark detection models on
faces of older adults with and without dementia, large dif-
ferences in performance were observed between the two
subgroups. For example, using the pre-trained FAN model,
the percentage of test images with NRMSE < 5% was 84.9%
in the cognitively healthy group, as compared to 72.0% in the
dementia group (Table 5).
When comparing NME distributions, all ﬁve landmark
detection models examined performed better on indepen-
dent older adults as compared to older adults with dementia
and the differences were statistically signiﬁcant (Table 4).
Similarly, when comparing NRMSE distributions, all ﬁve
landmark detection models examined performed better on
independent older adults as compared to older adults with
dementia and all but one of the differences were statistically
signiﬁcant (Table 3).
As interest in using facial analysis methods in clinical
applications grows – e.g. to assess pain in dementia [27]
or monitor the progression of amyotrophic lateral sclero-
sis (ALS) [28], [29] – this is an important ﬁnding that high-
lights the limitations of existing models when applied to
clinical populations.
VOLUME 7, 2019
25531

B. Taati et al.: Algorithmic Bias in Clinical Populations
We emphasize that even models trained on hundreds of
thousands of examples (FAN and OpenFace) exhibit this
bias, indicating that even large training datasets do not cap-
ture the variability of a clinical population. Algorithms and
pre-trained models investigated here include those reporting
current and past state-of-the-art performance on standard
benchmarks. Results and analyses presented here are not
meant to criticize these models as they represent the best tools
available today. Rather, our point is to demonstrate that off-
the-shelf models cannot be directly used in all clinical appli-
cations. The main challenge in obtaining good performance in
clinical populations is having access to representative training
data. It is not realistic to expect developers of these models
(often computer science academics or technology companies)
to include data from various clinical populations (dementia,
stroke, ALS, etc.) in their training data. Patient data and
identiﬁable health records (e.g. face images) are highly sen-
sitive and access is often restricted. A more realistic solution
might be to collect targeted represented training sets, e.g.
dementia examples for applications related to pain detection
in dementia, stroke examples for applications in orofacial
rehabilitation, etc.
Once we are cognizant of the limitations of existing mod-
els, the next natural question is to investigate methods of
resolving these limitations. In this work, we examined the
effect of including older faces and faces of people with
dementia in the training data.
The inclusion of older adults (Section III.C) signiﬁcantly
and substantially improved the performance of both the AAM
and the FAN models. Table 7, for instance, shows that the
percentage of dementia test images with NRMSE < 5%
moved from 72.0% in the pre-trained FAN model to 90.2%
with the inclusion of 336 face images from 42 cognitively
healthy older adults in the training data. Perhaps surpris-
ingly, inspecting Figure 2 and Figure 2, it appears that the
performance of the ﬁne-tuned FAN model does not improve
with the additional inclusion of dementia images. The values
shown in Figure 2 (red line) hover around 90% and do not
show improvement with an increase in the number of people
with dementia in the training data. By contrast, retrained
AAM models display a visible upward trend with no apparent
leveling off, even at D = 20.
To formally investigate these observations, a linear regres-
sion line was ﬁtted to the AAM and FAN trends for both
threshold values of 5% and 4%. Table 9 presents the adjusted
R2 value of the ﬁtted line, as well as the F-statistic and
TABLE 9. Comparing the linear regression lines fitted to the trends
in Figure 2 and Figure 3 vs. a constant model.
TABLE 10. Precision (%) and recall (%) in detecting AU4 and AU43.
the p-value of comparing the regression line vs. a constant
model; i.e. a horizontal line. As expected, the AAM trends
at both thresholds are signiﬁcantly different from a constant
model, while the FAN trends are not.
We do not have an explanation as to why the FAN
model does not improve with the addition of dementia
images. This is particularly surprising because the model
had a sizeable (∼20 percentage points) improvement when
it was ﬁne-tuned with independent older images. Neverthe-
less, the more important observation is that the AAM model
demonstrates signiﬁcant improvement with the additional
dementia images, to the point of reaching FAN performance
at D = 20 and NRMSE threshold of 5%, and far surpassing
FAN at D ≥10 and NRMSE threshold of 4%. This implies the
importance of having access to representative samples from
the target population. While the AAM model is considerably
simpler than the FAN model, this conﬁrms the intuition that
including representative data in the training set is more impor-
tant than the choice of algorithm used.
When evaluating facial action unit detection, neither of
the two pre-trained models tested performed well, and the
difference between performances on independent vs. demen-
tia subgroups was not signiﬁcant. Comparing the accuracy
(or AUC) values between the OpenFace and the Affdex
DSK (Table 8), it might appear at ﬁrst that the Affdex SDK
achieves reasonable performance with accuracy values larger
than 70% in detecting both AU4 and AU43. Accuracy and
AUC values, however, can over-represent the performance
of a model when the test data are not balanced. In our case,
AU4 and AU43 were not present in 75.9% and 78.3% of the
test images respectively. Inspecting the confusion matrices
reveals that both models performed poorly in detecting either
of the two action units tested. Precision and recall values of
the models are shown in Table 10, conﬁrming poor (< 50%)
precision in all 4 cases (2 models, 2 action units), and poor
recall in all but one case.
A limitation of this study is that the automatic detection
of only two facial action units (AU4 and AU43) is examined.
Future work could replicate this analysis on additional action
units. This study focused on individuals with one type of cog-
nitive impairment, namely dementia. Future work should also
expand the analysis to include individuals with other forms of
cognitive impairment (e.g. traumatic brain injury or autism),
and also to include individuals with physical impairments
(e.g. Parkinson’s disease and hemiplegia).
V. CONCLUSIONS
Through the experiments conducted for this paper we
have demonstrated the existence of algorithmic bias in
25532
VOLUME 7, 2019

B. Taati et al.: Algorithmic Bias in Clinical Populations
state-of-the-art facial landmark and expression recognition
methods, which affects the performance of these algorithms
for older adults with cognitive impairment. As interest in
using computer vision and facial analysis methods in clini-
cal applications grows (e.g. [30]–[33]), this study highlights
the limitations of existing computer vision models when
applied to clinical populations, and explores some of the
requirements for addressing these limitations (e.g. number
of representative training images required). Beyond facial
analysis, the interest in using machine learning / deep learn-
ing techniques in various clinical applications is also grow-
ing rapidly (e.g. [34]–[36]). Our work highlights the need
for developing algorithms that are explicitly designed to be
agnostic and fair with respect to sensitive data attributes such
as age and cognitive or physical ability.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Trigeorgis, P. Snape, M. A. Nicolaou, E. Antonakos, and S. Zafeiriou,
‘‘Mnemonic descent method: A recurrent process applied for end-to-end
face alignment,’’ in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 4177–4187.
[2] A. Bulat and G. Tzimiropoulos, ‘‘How far are we from solving the
2D & 3D face alignment problem? (and a dataset of 230,000 3D facial
landmarks),’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2017,
pp. 1021–1030.
[3] A. Bulat and G. Tzimiropoulos, ‘‘Binarized convolutional landmark
localizers for human pose estimation and face alignment with limited
resources,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2017,
pp. 3706–3714.
[4] A. S. Jackson, A. Bulat, V. Argyriou, and G. Tzimiropoulos, ‘‘Large pose
3D face reconstruction from a single image via direct volumetric CNN
regression,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2017,
pp. 1031–1039.
[5] Y. Sun, X. Wang, and X. Tang, ‘‘Deep convolutional network cascade for
facial point detection,’’ in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
Jun. 2013, pp. 3476–3483.
[6] J. Buolamwini and T. Gebru, ‘‘Gender shades: Intersectional accuracy dis-
parities in commercial gender classiﬁcation,’’ in Proc. 1st Conf. Fairness,
Accountability Transparency, Jan. 2018, pp. 77–91.
[7] T. Hadjistavropoulos, M. E. Browne, K. M. Prkachin, B. Taati, A. Ashraf,
and A. Mihailidis, ‘‘Pain in severe dementia: A comparison of a ﬁne-
grained assessment approach to an observational checklist designed
for clinical settings,’’ Eur. J. Pain, vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 915–925,
May 2018.
[8] J. N. Morris et al., ‘‘MDS cognitive performance scale,’’ J. Gerontology,
vol. 49, no. 4, pp. M174–M182, Jul. 1994.
[9] B. S. Husebo, L. I. Strand, R. Moe-Nilssen, S. B. Husebo, A. L. Snow, and
A. E. Ljunggren, ‘‘Mobilization-observation-behavior-intensity-dementia
pain scale (MOBID): Development and validation of a nurse-administered
pain assessment tool for use in dementia,’’ J. Pain Symptom Manage.,
vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 67–80, May 2007.
[10] K. M. Prkachin, ‘‘The consistency of facial expressions of pain:
A comparison across modalities,’’ Pain, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 297–306,
Dec. 1992.
[11] S. Chan, T. Hadjistavropoulos, J. Williams, and A. Lints-Martindale,
‘‘Evidence-based development and initial validation of the pain assess-
ment checklist for seniors with limited ability to communicate-II
(PACSLAC-II),’’ Clin. J. Pain, vol. 30, no. 9, pp. 816–824, Sep. 2014.
[12] I. Matthews and S. Baker, ‘‘Active appearance models revisited,’’ Int. J.
Comput. Vis., vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 135–164, Nov. 2004.
[13] J. Alabort-i-Medina, E. Antonakos, J. Booth, P. Snape, and S. Zafeiriou,
‘‘Menpo: A comprehensive platform for parametric image alignment and
visual deformable models,’’ in Proc. 22nd ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia,
Orlando, FL, USA, Nov. 2014, pp. 679–682.
[14] A. Newell, K. Yang, and J. Deng, ‘‘Stacked hourglass networks for
human pose estimation,’’ in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., Sep. 2016,
pp. 483–499.
[15] S. Zhu, C. Li, C. C. Loy, and X. Tang, ‘‘Face alignment by coarse-to-
ﬁne shape searching,’’ in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog-
nit. (CVPR), Jun. 2015, pp. 4998–5006.
[16] B.
Amos,
B.
Ludwiczuk,
and
M.
Satyanarayanan,
‘‘Openface:
A general-purpose face recognition library with mobile applications,’’
CMU School Comput. Sci., Pittsburgh, PA, USA, Tech. Rep. CMU-CS-
16-118, 2016.
[17] C. Sagonas, G. Tzimiropoulos, S. Zafeiriou, and M. Pantic, ‘‘A semi-
automatic methodology for facial landmark annotation,’’ in Proc.
IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops, Jun. 2013,
pp. 896–903.
[18] R. Gross, I. Matthews, J. Cohn, T. Kanade, and S. Baker, ‘‘Multi-PIE,’’
Image Vis. Comput., vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 807–813, May 2010.
[19] D. E. King, ‘‘Dlib-ml: A machine learning toolkit,’’ J. Mach. Learn. Res.,
vol. 10, pp. 1755–1758, Jul. 2009.
[20] A. Bulat and G. Tzimiropoulos, ‘‘Convolutional aggregation of local
evidence for large pose face alignment,’’ in Proc. Brit. Mach. Vis.
Conf. (BMVC), 2016, pp. 1–12.
[21] X. Zhu and D. Ramanan, ‘‘Face detection, pose estimation, and landmark
localization in the wild,’’ in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog-
nit., Jun. 2012, pp. 2879–2886.
[22] J. Shen, S. Zafeiriou, G. G. Chrysos, J. Kossaiﬁ, G. Tzimiropoulos, and
M. Pantic, ‘‘The ﬁrst facial landmark tracking in-the-wild challenge:
Benchmark and results,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. Work-
shop (ICCVW), Dec. 2015, pp. 1003–1011.
[23] D. McDuff, A. Mahmoud, M. Mavadati, M. Amr, J. Turcot, and
R. E. Kaliouby, ‘‘AFFDEX SDK: A cross-platform real-time multi-face
expression recognition toolkit,’’ in Proc. CHI Conf. Extended Abstr. Hum.
Factors Comput. Syst., May 2016, pp. 3723–3726.
[24] A. Asgarian, A. B. Ashraf, D. Fleet, and B. Taati, ‘‘Subspace selection
to suppress confounding source domain information in AAM transfer
learning,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Joint Conf. Biometrics (IJCB), Oct. 2017,
pp. 456–463.
[25] D. Haase, E. Rodner, and J. Denzler, ‘‘Instance-weighted transfer learning
of active appearance models,’’ in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2014, pp. 1426–1433.
[26] A. Asgarian et al. (2018). ‘‘A hybrid instance-based transfer learning
method.’’ [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.01063
[27] M.
Atee,
K.
Hoti,
R.
Parsons,
and
J.
D.
Hughes,
‘‘Pain
assessment in dementia: Evaluation of a point-of-care technological
solution,’’
J.
Alzheimer’s
Disease,
vol.
60,
no.
1,
pp. 137–150,
Jan. 2017.
[28] A. Bandini, J. R. Green, B. Taati, S. Orlandi, L. Zinman, and Y. Yunusova,
‘‘Automatic detection of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) from video-
based analysis of facial movements: Speech and non-speech tasks,’’ in
Proc. 13th IEEE Int. Conf. Autom. Face Gesture Recognit. (FG), May 2018,
pp. 150–157.
[29] A. Bandini, J. R. Green, J. Wang, T. F. Campbell, L. Zinman, and
Y. Yunusova, ‘‘Kinematic features of jaw and lips distinguish symptomatic
from presymptomatic stages of bulbar decline in amyotrophic lateral scle-
rosis,’’ J. Speech, Lang., Hearing Res., vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 1118–1129,
May 2018.
[30] A. Ashraf and B. Taati, ‘‘Automated video analysis of handwash-
ing behavior as a potential marker of cognitive health in older
adults,’’ IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 682–690,
Mar. 2016.
[31] M. H. Li, T. A. Mestre, S. H. Fox, and B. Taati, ‘‘Vision-based assessment
of parkinsonism and levodopa-induced dyskinesia with pose estimation,’’
J. NeuroEng. Rehabil., vol. 15, no. 1, p. 97, Nov. 2018.
[32] M. H. Li, T. A. Mestre, S. H. Fox, and B. Taati, ‘‘Automated assessment
of levodopa-induced dyskinesia: Evaluating the responsiveness of video-
based features,’’ Parkinsonism Related Disorders, vol. 53, pp. 42–45,
Aug. 2018.
[33] Y. Zhang et al., ‘‘Strength and similarity guided group-level brain func-
tional network construction for MCI diagnosis,’’ Pattern Recognit., vol. 88,
pp. 421–430, Apr. 2019.
[34] Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, X. Chen, S.-W. Lee, and D. Shen, ‘‘Hybrid high-
order functional connectivity networks using resting-state functional MRI
for mild cognitive impairment diagnosis,’’ Sci. Rep., vol. 7, Jul. 2017,
Art. no. 6530.
[35] Z. Jin, G. Zhou, D. Gao, and Y. Zhang, ‘‘EEG classiﬁcation using
sparse Bayesian extreme learning machine for brain–computer inter-
face,’’ Neural Comput. Appl., Oct. 2018, pp. 1–9. [Online]. Available:
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs00521-018-3735-3
VOLUME 7, 2019
25533

B. Taati et al.: Algorithmic Bias in Clinical Populations
BABAK TAATI (M’96) received the B.Sc. degree
in electrical engineering from the Sharif University
of Technology, Tehran, Iran, in 1997, the M.A.Sc.
degree in engineering science from Simon Fraser
University, Burnaby, BC, Canada, in 2002, and
the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from
Queen’s University, Kingston, ON, Canada.
From 2008 to 2009, he was the Lead Computer
Vision Scientist with Feeling Software, Montreal,
Canada. From 2009 to 2012, he was a Postdoctoral
Fellow with the University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, and also
with the Toronto Rehabilitation Institute. He has been a Scientist with the
Toronto Rehabilitation Institute—University Health Network, Toronto, since
2012. He is also an Assistant Professor with the Institute of Biomaterials
and Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto, and the Department of
Computer Science, University of Toronto. His research interests include the
application of computer vision systems in health monitoring, rehabilitation,
and diagnostic technologies.
SHUN ZHAO received the B.A.Sc. degree in elec-
trical engineering from the University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada, in 2015, and the M.Sc.
degree in cognitive science from The University
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, U.K., in 2016. He is
currently a Research Associate with the Toronto
Rehabilitation Institute—University Health Net-
work, Toronto.
AHMED
B.
ASHRAF
received
the
B.Sc.
degree in electrical engineering from the Uni-
versity of Engineering and Technology, Lahore,
Pakistan, in 2000, and the master’s and Ph.D.
degrees in electrical and computer engineering
from Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA,
USA, in 2006 and 2010 respectively.
From 2010 to 2013, he was a Postdoctoral
Fellow
with
the
Section
of
Biomedical
Image Analysis, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. From 2013 to 2018, he was a Postdoctoral
Fellow with the Toronto Rehabilitation Institute, University Health Network,
Toronto, ON, Canada. He is currently an Assistant Professor with the Depart-
ment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, MB, Canada. His research interests include machine learning,
biomedical imaging, and computer vision.
AZIN ASGARIAN received the B.Sc. degree in
computer science from the University of Tehran,
in 2011, and the M.A.Sc. degree in computer
science from the University of Toronto, in 2018.
During her master’s study, she spent two semesters
as a Research Assistant with University Health
Network, where she involved in several projects,
such as transfer learning, facial expression recog-
nition, and a vision-based pain detection system.
As an Applied Research Scientist with Georgian
Partners Inc., she is currently involved in transfer learning and domain
adaptation projects. Her main research interests include computer vision and
machine learning.
M. ERIN BROWNE received the B.Sc. degree in
psychology and the M.Sc. degree in experimen-
tal psychology from the University of Northern
British Columbia, BC, Canada, in 2010 and 2014,
respectively. She is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
degree in clinical psychology with the Depart-
ment of Psychology, University of Regina, SK,
Canada. Her research interests include the expres-
sion and perception of pain and emotion via facial
expression, facial action coding, and communica-
tive changes associated with aging and dementia.
KENNETH M. PRKACHIN received the B.A.
(Hons.) and M.A. degrees in psychology and the
Ph.D. degree in clinical psychology from The
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada, in 1972, 1976, and 1978, respectively.
He has held academic appointments with The
University of British Columbia, the University of
Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, and the University of
Northern British Columbia, Prince George, BC,
since 1978. He is currently a Professor Emeritus
with the University of Northern British Columbia. With his co-investigators,
Dr. P. Solomon and Dr. J. Cohn, he has established the UNBC-McMaster
Pain Archive, which has been used widely in the research on automated
analysis of pain expression. His research has focused on the behavioral
expression of pain, in particular on characterizing the nature and effects of
facial expressions of pain.
Dr. Prkachin is a Fellow of the Canadian Psychological Association.
ALEX MIHAILIDIS received the B.A.Sc. degree
in mechanical engineering and the M.A.Sc. degree
in biomedical engineering from the University
of Toronto, in 1996 and 1998, respectively, and
the Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering from
Strathclyde University, in 2003.
He is a currently a Professor with the Depart-
ment of Occupational Science and Occupational
Therapy, University of Toronto, and also with the
Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engi-
neering, University of Toronto. He is also the Scientiﬁc Director of the
AGE-WELL Network of Centres of Excellence. His research focuses on the
development of technology to support older adults and family caregivers,
through the application of artiﬁcial intelligence, sensors, and robotics. He is
a Fellow of the Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive Technology Society
of North America.
THOMAS
HADJISTAVROPOULOS
received
the B.A. degree (Hons.) in psychology from
McGill
University,
Montreal,
QC,
Canada,
in 1985, and the master’s and Ph.D. degrees
in clinical psychology from the University of
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada, in 1987
and 1991, respectively.
He has held academic appointments with The
University of British Columbia and the University
of Waterloo. He is currently a Professor of psy-
chology and the Research Chair in aging and health with the University of
Regina. He has published over 200 peer-reviewed papers and book chapters
as well as seven books. His research focuses on pain in older adults with
a special emphasis on seniors who have difﬁculty communicating their
experience because of severe dementia.
Dr. Hadjistavropoulos received the distinguished career awards from the
Saskatchewan Health Research Foundation and the Special Interest Group
of Pain in Older Persons from the International Association for the Study
of Pain. His honors include fellowships from the Canadian Academy of
Health Sciences, the Canadian Psychological Association, the American
Psychological Association, and the Canadian Association of Cognitive and
Behavioural Therapies. He has served a term as the President of the Canadian
Psychological Association.
25534
VOLUME 7, 2019
