International Journal of Nutrology (2025)
Page 1 of 7





Importance of nutrological management and gut microbiota in alzheimer's
disease: a systematic review
Márcia Cavalheiro Alves1* , Mateus Antunes Nogueira2 , Hugo Menezes Lopes3 ,
Ricardo de Oliveira Carvalho4 , Ana Claudia Santana Cano5 , Vittor Cândido Soares6 ,
Frederico Teixeira Izidorio7 , Juliana da Silva Pereira8 , Marília de Andrade Salvá9 ,
Thamyres Veras Alves10


1 Diagnosis Medical Imaging Clinic Setor C North CNC 1 s/n Lots 10/11. Taguatinga. Brasília, Distrito Federal, Brazil.
2 Active Life Teaching and Research (Vida Ativa Ensino e Pesquisa). Street: Paes Leme, 215, conjunto 307, Zip code: 05424-
150, Pinheiros, São Paulo, Brazil.
3 Nossa Senhora das Graças Hospital. Street: Visconde de Jequitinhonha, 1144, Boa Viagem, Recife, Pernambuco, Brazil.
4 University Hospital-UFPI University Campus Minister Petrônio Portela, s/n - Ininga, Teresina, Piauí, Brazil.
5 Auxiliadora Hospital. Avenue Rosario Congro, 1533, Colinos, Três Lagoas, Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil.
6 Hospital da Mulher Mãe Luzia. Obstetric ICU. Avenue Fab, 81 - Central, Macapá, Amapá, Brazil.
7 Araxá emergency care unit. Av João Paulo II, 1900. Araxá, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
8 Livia Hasegawa Clinic. Street: Manoel da Nobrega, 354, cj 16 Paraiso, São Paulo, Brazil.
9 Medradius Oncological Hospital. Street: Hugo Corrêa Paes, 104, Gruta de Lourdes, Maceió, Alagoas, Brazil.
10 Pelopidas Silveira Hospital, 232, km 6, Curado, Recife, Pernambuco, Brazil.

*Corresponding author: Dr. Márcia Cavalheiro Alves.
Diagnosis Medical Imaging Clinic Setor C North CNC 1 s/n
Lots 10/11. Taguatinga. Brasília, Distrito Federal, Brazil.
E-mail: marciacavalheiro@hotmail.com
DOI: https://doi.org/10.54448/ijn25104
Received: 11-13-2024; Revised: 01-15-2025; Accepted: 01-20-2025; Published: 01-24-2025; IJN-id: e25104
Editor: Dr. Idiberto José Zotarelli-Filho, MSc, Ph.D., Post-Doctoral.

Abstract
Introduction: In the context of neurodegenerative
diseases, Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common
form of dementia. It is estimated that more than 46
million people are affected worldwide. Several factors
contribute to the risk of developing late-onset
Alzheimer's disease, including advanced age, genetic
factors, family history, history of head trauma,
hypertension in midlife, obesity, diabetes, and
hypercholesterolemia.
Studies
have
shown
the
important role of the gut microbiota in controlling this
condition,
together
with
adequate
nutrition.
Objective: It was to analyze the relationship between
dietary
patterns,
gut
microbiota,
micro
and
macronutrients, and cognitive disorders in Alzheimer's
disease. Methods: The systematic review rules of the
PRISMA Platform were followed. The search was
conducted from May to August 2024 in the Scopus,
PubMed, Science Direct, Scielo, and Google Scholar
databases. The quality of the studies was based on the
GRADE instrument and the risk of bias was analyzed
according to the Cochrane instrument. Results and
Conclusion: A total of 140 articles were found. 75
articles were fully assessed and 30 were included and
developed in the present systematic review study.
Considering the Cochrane tool for risk of bias, the
overall assessment resulted in 15 studies with a high
risk of bias and 25 studies that did not meet GRADE
and AMSTAR-2. Most studies showed homogeneity in
their results, with X2=89.5%>50%. It was concluded
that several antioxidants found in a healthy natural diet
can efficiently attenuate free radical attacks and
neutralize
dysregulated
pro-oxidants,
reducing
oxidative stress and the induction of degenerative
diseases such as Alzheimer's disease. Studies have
found that plasma lipopolysaccharide levels in patients
with Alzheimer's disease were three times higher than
in healthy controls. Thus, increased concentrations of
plasma lipopolysaccharide and fecal calprotectin
indicate an altered intestinal barrier function and
increased inflammation and intestinal permeability in
patients with Alzheimer's disease.
REVIEW ARTICLE
DOI: 10.54448/ijn25104

International Journal of Nutrology (2025)
Page 2 of 7
International Journal of Nutrology, São Paulo, Vol 18,  Iss 1,  e25104, 2025



Keywords: Alzheimer's disease. Gut microbiota.
Nutrology.

Introduction
In the context of neurodegenerative diseases,
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of
dementia. It is estimated that more than 46 million
people are affected worldwide. Several factors
contribute to the risk of developing late-onset
Alzheimer's disease, including advanced age, genetic
factors, family history, history of head trauma,
hypertension in midlife, obesity, diabetes, and
hypercholesterolemia [1].
Currently, available drugs for the treatment of AD
have only symptomatic effects, and there is an unmet
need to prevent the onset of AD, as well as to slow the
progression of the disease to mild cognitive impairment
(MCI) in the absence of disease-modifying therapies.
In the last decade, one of the hypotheses raised was
the association between lifestyle factors, such as diet
and eating habits, and the occurrence of AD and
dementia. Dietary factors can affect the risk of
cardiovascular disease (CVD), also influencing the risk
of AD and dementia [2].
A growing body of evidence suggests that certain
diets are associated with a lower incidence of AD, so
maintaining a healthy diet may have an impact on
many of these potential risk factors for cognitive
decline [2]. Therefore, high dietary monounsaturated
fatty acids (MUFA) and n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids
(n-3 PUFA), high fish consumption, together with high
antioxidant levels from fruits and vegetables and
regulated gut microbiota, may have a beneficial effect
on dementia risk [3,4]. However, the diet should be
considered as a whole, consisting of a complex of
nutritional principles, foods, micronutrients, and
macronutrients that interact with each other. Indeed,
combinations of foods and nutrients in certain patterns
may act synergistically to provide stronger health
effects than those conferred by their food components.
The National Association on Aging and Alzheimer's
Disease (NIA-AA) guidelines for AD and cognitive
decline due to AD pathology [5] introduced evidence
suggesting a direct relationship between diet and
dietary changes on brain structure and activity, thus
opening the era of brain imaging biomarkers in
nutritional epidemiology.
Therefore, the present study analyzed the
relationship between dietary patterns, gut microbiota,
micronutrients and macronutrients, and cognitive
impairments in Alzheimer's disease.


Methods
Study Design
This study followed the international systematic
review model, following the PRISMA (preferred
reporting items for systematic reviews and metaanalysis) rules. Available at: http://www.prismastatement.org/?AspxAutoDetectCookieSupport=1.
Accessed on: 07/10/2024. The AMSTAR-2 (Assessing
the methodological quality of systematic reviews)
methodological quality standards were also followed.
Available
at:
https://amstar.ca/.
Accessed
on:
07/10/2024.

Search Strategy and Search Sources
The literature search process was carried out from
May to August 2024 and developed based on Scopus,
PubMed, Science Direct, Scielo, and Google Scholar,
covering scientific articles from various periods to the
present day. The following descriptors (DeCS /MeSH
Terms)
were
used:
“Alzheimer's
disease.
Gut
microbiota. Nutrologia”, and using the Boolean "and"
between MeSH terms and "or" between historical
discoveries. The articles selected used the period from
2009 to 2023 as inclusion criteria, considering research
from the last 13 years. All types of available studies
were selected, including prospective, retrospective,
case-control, cross-sectional studies, case reports, in
vitro and in vivo studies, as well as systematic and
literature reviews. Studies that did not correlate diet or
microbiota with Alzheimer's disease or other cognitive
diseases in their abstract were excluded.

Results and Discussion
Summary of Findings
A total of 140 articles were found that were
subjected to eligibility analysis, and then 30 articles
were selected to compose the results of this systematic
review. The studies listed were of medium to high
quality (Figure 1), considering in the first instance the
level of scientific evidence of studies in study types
such as meta-analysis, consensus, randomized clinical,
prospective, and observational. Biases did not
compromise the scientific basis of the studies.
According to the GRADE instrument, most studies
presented
homogeneity
in
their
results,
with
X2=89.5%>50%. Considering the Cochrane tool for
risk of bias, the overall assessment resulted in 15
studies with a high risk of bias and 25 studies that did
not meet GRADE and AMSTAR-2.

Figure 1. Flowchart showing the article selection
process.

International Journal of Nutrology (2025)
Page 3 of 7
International Journal of Nutrology, São Paulo, Vol 18,  Iss 1,  e25104, 2025




Source: Own authorship.

Figure 2 presents the results of the risk of bias of
the studies using the Funnel Plot, showing the
calculation of the Effect Size (Magnitude of the
difference) using Cohen's Test (d). Precision (sample
size) was determined indirectly by the inverse of the
standard error (1/Standard Error). This graph had a
symmetrical behavior, not suggesting a significant risk
of bias, both among studies with small sample sizes
(lower precision) that are shown at the base of the
graph and in studies with large sample sizes that are
shown at the top.

Figure 2. The symmetrical funnel plot does not suggest
a risk of bias among the studies with small sample sizes
that are shown at the bottom of the graph. High
confidence and high recommendation studies are shown
above the graph (n=30 studies).


Source: Own authorship.

Main Results
Cells gradually degenerate with aging. Cellular
degeneration in aging is a highly complex process with
several mechanisms and pathways involved [6]. During
aging, cellular metabolic redox reactions occur that
induce detrimental genetic and biochemical changes.
Increased production of reactive oxygen species (ROS)
and
nitrogen
damages
cellular
proteins,
lipids,
carbohydrates, and nucleic acids through oxidative
stress, contributing to cellular degeneration during
aging [7]. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive
nitrogen species (RNS) are short-lived, but increased
redox reactions continuously generate new ROS and
RNS, and are believed to contribute to the onset of
several
degenerative
diseases,
including
cancer,
diabetes, Alzheimer's, and Parkinson's [6].
Metabolic and physiological behavior changes
rapidly with aging. Thus, highperformance cells and
tissues, including postmitotic cells (brain and heart), are
likely to be severely affected by ROS overload. This is
one of the fundamental bases for the hypothesis of
degenerative diseases induced by oxidative stress in the
elderly [7]. Normal metabolic processes or cellular
stresses continuously generate ROS and RNS and they
accumulate over time. High levels of pro-oxidant
impairment and weakening of antioxidant defense
mechanisms are more common in the elderly,
suggesting that the elderly population is more affected
by associated degenerative diseases.
AD is a complex and chronic neurodegenerative
disorder related to aging. The mechanisms of AD are
largely unknown. Inflammation, intracellular release of
calcium ions, autophagy, apoptosis, and, mainly,
overproduction and aggregation (crosslinking) of Aβ
peptides
are
believed
to
be
involved
in
AD
neurodegeneration [8]. Neuronal cells, among others,
are particularly susceptible to degenerations induced by
oxidative stress [9].
Neurons are metabolically active cells and use large
amounts of oxygen, approximately one-quarter of the
total oxygen consumed in the body, during metabolism.
As a result, neuronal cells generate an enormous
amount of ROS and RNS and are subject to free radical
attacks. Compared to other cells, neurons comprise a
low level of antioxidant defense molecules and contain
a higher amount of polyunsaturated fatty acids prone to
oxidation [9]. Lipid oxidation is one of the pathological
markers found in AD brain tissue [7]. Highly oxidizable
polyunsaturated fatty acids, such as arachidonic and
docosahexaenoic acids, are present in the brain, and
lipid peroxidation damages neuronal membranes, thus
favoring damage to brain structures.
Pro-oxidant overload is associated with age-related
degenerative
diseases
and
antioxidant
defense
mechanisms may play vital roles in attenuating prooxidant activity and helping to prevent disease
progression. Thus, enhancing antioxidant pathways
and/or
neutralizing
pro-oxidants
by
exogenous
antioxidants may provide viable preventive options for
degenerative diseases [1].

International Journal of Nutrology (2025)
Page 4 of 7
International Journal of Nutrology, São Paulo, Vol 18,  Iss 1,  e25104, 2025


Gut Microbiota, Diet, and Alzheimer’s Disease
The health and diversity of the gut microbiota are
directly dependent on food. The gut microbiota plays an
important role in increasing or decreasing the risk of AD.
The gastrointestinal tract, from the esophagus to the
anus, is lined by a layer of epithelial cells, which form
the intestinal mucosal barrier to protect the body from
infection by pathogenic microorganisms and prevent
particles, chemicals, bacteria, and other health hazards.
They play important roles in protecting the health of the
host [10]. When problems with intestinal permeability
occur, which is called leaky gut, disruption of the
intestinal
barrier
functions
causes
leaky
gut
accompanied by increased inflammatory levels and
resulting in the occurrence of diseases [11].
The integrity of the blood-brain barrier (BBB) is vital
for brain development and function. In the past, it was
believed that the BBB was impermeable and could
prevent potentially harmful substances from entering
the brain. It has recently been discovered that many
substances can threaten the integrity of the BBB,
causing all kinds of molecules, including proteins,
viruses, and even bacteria, to enter the brain and
threaten brain health [12].
Changes in the gut environment can gradually
destroy the brain’s ability to protect it from toxic
substances. Inflammation-induced by a leaky gut will
result in a leaky brain, which is the increased
permeability of the BBB. The disruption of the balance
of gut microbiota is directly related to a leaky gut [13].
Stress, infection by pathogens, and antibiotics can
destroy the gut microbiota and lead to increased
intestinal permeability.
Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is a combination of lipids
and sugar and an important component of the cell wall
of gram-negative bacteria. There are about 50% to 70%
of gram-negative bacteria in the normal gut microbiota.
LPS, which is an endotoxin, induces severe inflammation
of the body if it enters the bloodstream. In healthy
conditions, LPS is blocked from the bloodstream by the
tight junctions that exist between intestinal epithelial
cells [13].
When intestinal permeability is increased, LPS finds
its
way
into
the
bloodstream
and
results
in
inflammation. Therefore, blood LPS levels represent not
only inflammation but also a leaky gut. Studies have
found that plasma LPS levels in AD patients were three
times higher than in healthy controls [14]. Increased
plasma LPS and fecal calprotectin concentrations
indicate altered intestinal barrier function and increased
inflammation and intestinal permeability in AD patients.
These results further confirm that the gut microbiota
may participate in the pathogenesis of AD [15].
As previously demonstrated, oxidative stress
results in cellular damage. Therefore, seeking ways to
promote antioxidant effects may prevent the occurrence
of AD. Vitamin A and β-carotene may be key molecules
for the prevention and therapy of AD, due to their ability
to inhibit the formation of Aβ oligomers and fibrils.
Lower serum and plasma concentrations of vitamin A
and β-carotene have been observed in patients with AD,
and higher plasma β-carotene levels have been
associated with improved memory performance [16].
Another important vitamin in reducing Aβ oligomer
formation and oxidative stress is vitamin C. Overall,
there is a large body of evidence that maintaining
healthy vitamin C levels may have a protective function
against AD [17].
B vitamins may contribute to AD by inhibiting
oxidative
stress
and
decreasing
homocysteine
concentrations [18]. High homocysteine concentrations
have been associated with an increased risk of AD, and
homocysteine has been significantly elevated in patients
with AD; high-dose vitamin B6, B12, and folate
supplementation
reduce
plasma
homocysteine
concentrations in patients with AD; homocysteinelowering treatment may be a therapeutic target for AD
[19].
Vitamin D may have little association with Aβ
mechanisms, and its potential association with AD may
involve other pathways, such as antioxidant, vascular,
anti-inflammatory, or metabolic pathways. A metaanalysis of 10 studies showed that AD cases had lower
serum concentrations of vitamin D than matched
controls [20].
Current knowledge does not provide evidence for
the role of selenium (Se) in the treatment of AD, but it
is believed to have a possible preventive relevance, and
selenium has been reported to play an important role in
antioxidant defense. AD patients had significantly lower
plasma selenium levels when compared to controls
[18].
Polyphenols are natural antioxidants that provide
protective effects in AD through a variety of biological
actions, such as interaction with transition metals,
inactivation
of
free
radicals,
inhibition
of
the
inflammatory response, modulation of the activity of
different enzymes, and effects on intracellular signaling
pathways and gene expression. A randomized, doubleblind,
controlled
clinical
trial
of
polyphenol
supplementation in 100 individuals showed that
polyphenols contained in antioxidant beverages may
benefit
AD
patients
by
lowering
homocysteine
concentrations in AD patients [21].
The study by Eskelinen et al., (2009) [22] followed
1,409 individuals in Finland aged 65–79 years for 21
years and found that people who drank three to five
cups of coffee daily in midlife had a 65% lower risk of

International Journal of Nutrology (2025)
Page 5 of 7
International Journal of Nutrology, São Paulo, Vol 18,  Iss 1,  e25104, 2025


AD compared to people who did not drink coffee or
drank less than two cups per day.
The effect of coffee can be explained in two ways.
First, the gut microbiota can easily digest the fiber in
coffee beans and harvest its energy to aid their growth.
At the same time, they can reduce the ratio of Firmicutes
to Bacteroidetes bacteria, and this change in the ratio of
Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes is associated with reduced
inflammation. Second, the body’s ability to utilize coffee
polyphenols is also influenced by the gut microbiota to
a large extent. After consumption, polyphenols need to
be degraded by the gut microbiota into small molecules
that are easily absorbed by the human body. Therefore,
to obtain sufficient health benefits and increase the
bioavailability and activity of polyphenols, it is necessary
to have a healthy gut microbiota. The protective role of
other antioxidants and nutrients may also depend on the
balance of the gut microbiota to some extent. Healthy
gut microbiota can increase their biological activity and
utilization, and thus exert their maximum protective role
on the brain and reduce the risk of AD [13].
Increased monounsaturated fatty acid is associated
with improved cognitive function, while increased
saturated fatty acid is associated with worsened
cognitive
function.
Monounsaturated
fatty
acids
(MUFAs) and MUFA derivatives have antiinflammatory
effects, and MUFA derivatives, including low molecular
weight phenols, have been reported to have antioxidant
effects. Data from a prospective study suggested that
higher monounsaturated fatty acid intake is associated
with less cognitive decline [23].
A high intake of polyunsaturated fatty acids may be
beneficial for AD. Dietary supplementation of omega-3
polyunsaturated fatty acids affects the expression of
genes that may influence the inflammatory process.
Dacosahexaenoic acid (DHA), the main form of omega-
3 fatty acids, reduces Aβ production and pathological
changes in animal models of AD. One study showed that
omega-3 fatty acids slowed cognitive decline in elderly
individuals without dementia [24].
Diet is generally considered to be closely associated
with the occurrence of AD. Omega-3 polyunsaturated
fatty acids are vital for neuronal and brain functions. Low
body levels of omega-3 may be associated with
neurodegenerative diseases, including AD. The intestine
is the primary site for absorbing fatty acids, and omega-
3 absorption in the intestine is limited by a variety of
conditions, including the fatty acid composition of the
diet, the body itself, and the existing form of fatty acids
[25].
Dietary fatty acids are one of the main carbon
sources for the gut microbiota. The gut microbiota can
metabolize dietary fatty acids alter the fatty acid
composition in the intestine, and eventually alter the
body's fatty acid composition. The gut microbiota can
also participate in the intestinal absorption of omega-3.
Dietary fatty acids can also directly or indirectly
modulate the composition of the gut microbiota and
influence the host immune system. The composition of
the gut microbiota changed significantly in mice fed an
omega-3-enriched diet [23].
The Western diet is characterized by a higher
intake of red meat and processed products, refined
grains, sweets, and desserts. The high-fat Western diet
may contribute to the development of AD by affecting
Aβ deposition and oxidative stress [25]. In contrast, a
study of 3054 participants evaluated participants who
consumed a healthy diet, defined as positively
correlated with the consumption of fruits, whole grains,
fresh dairy products, vegetables, breakfast cereals, tea,
good fats, nuts, and fish and negatively correlated with
meat, poultry, refined grains, animal fat, and processed
meat. Participants with the highest compared to the
lowest adherence to the healthy diet had better
cognitive function [26].
Furthermore, the Mediterranean diet, a typical diet
of the Mediterranean region, is characterized by a high
consumption of fruits, vegetables, cereals, bread,
potatoes, poultry, beans, nuts, olive oil, and fish; a
moderate consumption of alcohol (wine); lower
consumption of red meat and dairy products. Adherence
to the Mediterranean diet may not only affect the risk of
AD but also mortality in the disease. A meta-analysis of
eighteen cohort studies with 2,190,627 individuals
showed that adherence to the Mediterranean diet was
associated with a significant reduction in overall
mortality and neurodegenerative diseases [27]. The
Mediterranean diet appeared to benefit the health of
patients with Crohn's disease, reflected by a tendency
to reduce biomarkers of inflammation, in addition to
normalizing
the
gut
microbiota
with
increased
Bacteroidetes
and
Clostridium
and
decreased
Proteobacteria and Bacillaceae [28]. The Mediterranean
diet may play important roles in disease control,
including the treatment of AD by balancing the gut
microbiota [29,30].

Conclusion
It was concluded that several antioxidants found in
a healthy natural diet can efficiently attenuate free
radical attacks and neutralize dysregulated prooxidants, reducing oxidative stress and the induction of
degenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease.
Studies have found that plasma lipopolysaccharide
levels in patients with Alzheimer's disease were three
times higher than in healthy controls. Thus, increased
plasma
lipopolysaccharide
and
fecal
calprotectin

International Journal of Nutrology (2025)
Page 6 of 7
International Journal of Nutrology, São Paulo, Vol 18,  Iss 1,  e25104, 2025


concentrations indicate altered intestinal barrier function
and increased inflammation and intestinal permeability
in patients with Alzheimer's disease.

CRediT
Author contributions: Conceptualization - Márcia
Cavalheiro Alves, Mateus Antunes Nogueira, Hugo Menezes
Lopes; Data curation - Vittor Cândido Soares, Frederico
Teixeira Izidorio, Juliana da Silva Pereira, Marília de Andrade
Salvá, Thamyres Veras Alves; Formal Analysis - Márcia
Cavalheiro Alves; Investigation - Márcia Cavalheiro Alves,
Ricardo de Oliveira Carvalho; Methodology - Márcia
Cavalheiro Alves; Project administration -Márcia
Cavalheiro Alves; Supervision-Frederico Teixeira Izidorio,
Juliana da Silva Pereira; Writing - original draft- Márcia
Cavalheiro Alves, Mateus Antunes Nogueira, Ricardo de
Oliveira Carvalho, Ana Claudia Santana Cano, Vittor Cândido
Soares, Frederico Teixeira Izidorio, Juliana da Silva Pereira,
Marília de Andrade Salvá, Thamyres Veras Alves; Writingreview & editing- Márcia Cavalheiro Alves, Mateus
Antunes Nogueira, Ricardo de Oliveira Carvalho, Ana Claudia
Santana Cano, Vittor Cândido Soares, Frederico Teixeira
Izidorio, Juliana da Silva Pereira, Marília de Andrade Salvá,
Thamyres Veras Alves.

Acknowledgment
Not applicable.

Ethical Approval
Not applicable.

Informed Consent
It was applicable.


Funding
Not applicable.

Data Sharing Statement
No additional data are available.

Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Similarity Check
It was applied by Ithenticate@.

Peer Review Process
It was performed.

About The License©
The author(s) 2025.  The text of this article is open
access   and   licensed   under   a   Creative   Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License.

References
1.
Ferreiro AL, Choi J, Ryou J, Newcomer EP,
Thompson R, Bollinger RM, Hall-Moore C, Ndao
IM, Sax L, Benzinger TLS, Stark SL, Holtzman DM,
Fagan AM, Schindler SE, Cruchaga C, Butt OH,
Morris JC, Tarr PI, Ances BM, Dantas G. Gut
microbiome composition may be an indicator of
preclinical Alzheimer's disease. Sci Transl Med.
2023
Jun
14;15(700):eabo2984.
doi:
10.1126/scitranslmed.abo2984.
2.
Simão DO, Vieira VS, Tosatti JAG, Gomes KB.
Lipids,
Gut
Microbiota,
and
the
Complex
Relationship
with
Alzheimer's
Disease:
A
Narrative
Review.
Nutrients.
2023
Nov
3;15(21):4661. doi: 10.3390/nu15214661.
3.
Loef, Martin; Walach, Harald. Fruit, vegetables
and prevention of cognitive decline or dementia:
a systematic review of cohort studies. The journal
of nutrition, health & aging, 2012, v. 16, n. 7, p.
626-630.
4.
Panza, Francesco et al. Alcohol consumption in
mild cognitive impairment and dementia: harmful
or neuroprotective?. International journal of
geriatric psychiatry, 2012, v. 27, n. 12, p. 1218-
1238.
5.
Mckhann, Guy M. et al. The diagnosis of dementia
due to Alzheimer’s disease: Recommendations
from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s
Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines
for Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimer's & dementia,
2011, v. 7, n. 3, p. 263-269.
6.
Cui H, Kong Y, Zhang H. Oxidative stress,
mitochondrial dysfunction, and aging. Journal of
signal transduction, v. 2012.
7.
Persson T, Popescu, Bogdan O.; Cedazo-Minguez,
Angel. Oxidative stress in Alzheimer’s disease:
why did antioxidant therapy fail?. Oxidative
medicine and cellular longevity, v. 2014.
8.
Hardas SS. et al. Oxidative modification of lipoic
acid by HNE in Alzheimer disease brain. Redox
biology, 2013, v. 1, n. 1, p. 80-85.
9.
kim G, Ha et al. The role of oxidative stress in
neurodegenerative
diseases.
Experimental
neurobiology, 2015, v. 24, n. 4, p. 325-340.
10. Turner JR. Intestinal mucosal barrier function in
health and disease. Nature reviews immunology,
2009, v. 9, n. 11, p. 799.
11. Kelly JR. et al. Breaking down the barriers: the
gut microbiome, intestinal permeability and
stress-related psychiatric disorders. Frontiers in

International Journal of Nutrology (2025)
Page 7 of 7
International Journal of Nutrology, São Paulo, Vol 18,  Iss 1,  e25104, 2025


cellular neuroscience, 2015, v. 9, p. 392.
12. Welling Mick M, Nabuurs Rob JA, Van Der Weerd
L. Potential role of antimicrobial peptides in the
early onset of Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimer's &
Dementia, 2015, v. 11, n. 1, p. 51-57.
13. Jakobsson HE. et al. The composition of the gut
microbiota shapes the colon mucus barrier. EMBO
reports, 2015, v. 16, n. 2, p. 164-177.
14. Zhang R et al. Circulating endotoxin and systemic
immune activation in sporadic amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (sALS). Journal of neuroimmunology,
2009, v. 206, n. 1-2, p. 121-124.
15. Scheperjans Filip et al. Gut microbiota are related
to Parkinson's disease and clinical phenotype.
Movement Disorders, 2015, v. 30, n. 3, p. 350-
358.
16. Vina J. et al. Antioxidant pathways in Alzheimer's
disease: possibilities of intervention. Current
pharmaceutical design, 2011, v. 17, n. 35, p.
3861-3864.
17. Harrison FE. A critical review of vitamin C for the
prevention of age-related cognitive decline and
Alzheimer's disease. Journal of Alzheimer's
Disease, 2012, v. 29, n. 4, p. 711-726.
18. Cardoso BRita et al. Nutritional status of selenium
in Alzheimer's disease patients. British journal of
nutrition, 2010, v. 103, n. 6, p. 803-806.
19. Ho RCM et al. Is high homocysteine level a risk
factor for cognitive decline in elderly? A
systematic review, meta-analysis, and metaregression. The American Journal of Geriatric
Psychiatry, 2011, v. 19, n. 7, p. 607-617.
20. Annweiler C, Llewellyn DJ, Beauchet O. Low
serum vitamin D concentrations in Alzheimer's
disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Journal of Alzheimer's Disease, 2013, v. 33, n. 3,
p. 659-674.
21. Galasko DR. et al. Antioxidants for Alzheimer
disease:
a
randomized
clinical
trial
with
cerebrospinal fluid biomarker measures. Archives
of neurology, 2012, v. 69, n. 7, p. 836-841.
22. Eskelinen MH. et al. Midlife coffee and tea
drinking and the risk of late-life dementia: a
population-based
CAIDE
study.
Journal
of
Alzheimer's Disease, 2009, v. 16, n. 1, p. 85-91.
23. Yu Hai-Ning et al. Effects of fish oil with a high
content of n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids on
mouse gut microbiota. Archives of medical
research, 2014, v. 45, n. 3, p. 195-202.
24. FotuhI M, Mohassel P, Yaffe K. Fish consumption,
long-chain omega-3 fatty acids and risk of
cognitive decline or Alzheimer disease: a complex
association. Nature Reviews Neurology, 2009, v.
5, n. 3, p. 140.
25. Gu Y, Scarmeas N. Dietary patterns in Alzheimer's
disease and cognitive aging. Current Alzheimer
Research, 2011, v. 8, n. 5, p. 510-519.
26. Kesse-Guyot E et al. A healthy dietary pattern at
midlife is associated with subsequent cognitive
performance. The Journal of nutrition, 2012, v.
142, n. 5, p. 909-915.
27. Sofi F et al. Accruing evidence on benefits of
adherence to the Mediterranean diet on health:
an updated systematic review and meta-analysis.
The American journal of clinical nutrition, 2010,
v. 92, n. 5, p. 1189-1196.
28. Marlow G et al. Transcriptomics to study the
effect of a Mediterranean-inspired diet on
inflammation in Crohn's disease patients. Human
genomics, 2013, v. 7, n. 1, p. 24.
29. Lauer AA, Grimm HS, Apel B, Golobrodska N,
Kruse L, Ratanski E, Schulten N, Schwarze L,
Slawik T, Sperlich S, Vohla A, Grimm MOW.
Mechanistic Link between Vitamin B12 and
Alzheimer's Disease. Biomolecules. 2022 Jan
14;12(1):129. doi: 10.3390/biom12010129.
30. Chu CQ, Yu LL, Qi GY, Mi YS, Wu WQ, Lee YK,
Zhai QX, Tian FW, Chen W. Can dietary patterns
prevent
cognitive
impairment
and
reduce
Alzheimer's disease risk: Exploring the underlying
mechanisms of effects. Neurosci Biobehav Rev.
2022
Apr;135:104556.
doi:
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2022.104556.






















https://zotarellifilhoscientificworks.com/
