Detection of Mild Cognitive Impairment Using Facial Features in
Video Conversations
Muath Alsuhaibania,b, Hiroko H. Dodgec and Mohammad H. Mahoora,∗
aDepartment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Denver, Denver 80208, CO, United States
bDepartment of Electrical Engineering, Prince Sattam Bin Abdulaziz University, Al-Kharj 11942, Saudi Arabia
cDepartment of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston 02114, MA, United States
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Facial features
Deep learning
Mild cognitive impairment
Causal conversation
Older adults
A B S T R A C T
Early detection of Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) leads to early interventions to slow the
progression from MCI into dementia. Deep Learning (DL) algorithms could help achieve early
non-invasive, low-cost detection of MCI. This paper presents the detection of MCI in older adults
using DL models based only on facial features extracted from video-recorded conversations at home.
We used the data collected from the I-CONECT behavioral intervention study (NCT02871921),
where several sessions of semi-structured interviews between socially isolated older individuals and
interviewers were video recorded. We develop a framework that extracts spatial holistic facial features
using a convolutional autoencoder and temporal information using transformers. Our proposed DL
model was able to detect the I-CONECT study participants’ cognitive conditions (MCI vs. those
with normal cognition (NC)) using facial features. The segments and sequence information of the
facial features improved the prediction performance compared with the non-temporal features. The
detection accuracy using this combined method reached 88% whereas 84% is the accuracy without
applying the segments and sequences information of the facial features within a video on a certain
theme.
1. Introduction
The Alzheimer’s Association is projecting the number of Americans age 65 and older who are living with
Alzheimer’s disease-related dementia to double by 2050.
Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is a brain disease affecting memory and other cognitive functions, ultimately deteriorating
a patient’s ability to perform daily tasks. Mild Cognitive
Impairment (MCI) has a high likelihood to progress to
AD overtime. Older adults (MCI) can live independently
but they start having difficulty with tasks that depends on
memory, language, or other thinking skills. Currently, older
adults with MCI are diagnosed clinically; however, their
daily challenges are often not noticeable to those whom
they encounter irregularly. Early diagnosis of MCI helps
to identify people who are at increased risk of developing
dementia. Once identified, those with MCI can then be
offered information, advice, and support and be kept under
review. Also, if they do develop dementia, they would have
been diagnosed sooner and receive treatment [1].
It is often challenging to diagnose MCI as it requires
in-depth neuropsychological assessments [2], brain positron
emission tomography (PET) scan, or spinal fluid test for
amyloid beta protein [3–7]. Although recent advancements
in plasma blood biomarkers could provide more affordable
solutions in the future, we need to come up with costeffective, non-invasive approaches to identify MCI at an
early stage in the community.
∗Corresponding author
muath.alsuhaibani@du.edu (M. Alsuhaibani);
hdodge@mgh.harvard.edu (H.H. Dodge);
mohammad.mahoor@du.edu (M.H. Mahoor)
Artificial Intelligence (AI) has shown to be a promising
technique for achieving an automated detection of cognitive
impairment conditions at an early stage. Thus, the number
of research in recent years that aim to use AI in medical
condition detection has surged. AI showed that extracting
valuable features from users’ physiological, biological, and
behavioral patterns would detect the human medical condition. Although many AI studies are focused on clinical
assessments and medical scans such as PET, magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), functional MRI (fMRI), and
electroencephalogram (EEG) [8–10], further research needs
to be developed in analyzing behavioral patterns using Deep
Learning (DL) methods.
Deep learning algorithms are an essential subset of
AI. The DL models include various architectures that have
been proven to resolve substantial challenges in many fields
including computer vision. The DL models help to extract
useful features from large amounts of data. The outstanding
achievements of AI systems in digital healthcare performance were achieved by deep learning. For example, several
types of cancers are detected using DL models [11–13].
Detection of medical conditions such as depression [14,
15], Parkinson’s [16], or other psychiatric impairments [17]
has been successfully studied with patients’ facial features
using DL approaches. These algorithms are applied to analyze facial features. In this study, we capture facial features
from semi-structured video interviews of MCI and normal
cognition (NC) participants who underwent an I-CONECT
clinical trial (clinicaltrials.gov#: NCT02871921) [18]. This
clinical trial was aimed to enhance cognitive reserve by
providing frequent conversations to socially isolated older
subjects. The interaction between the elderly and the study
interviewers via a webcam could show the cognitive status
Alsuhaibani et al.
Page 1 of 10
arXiv:2308.15624v1  [cs.CV]  29 Aug 2023

Detection of MCI Using Facial Features in Video Conversations
of the older participants. We hypothesize that patterns in
facial features among MCI make them distinguishable from
those with normal cognition. We propose a DL method that
detects cognitive conditions in older adults using their facial
features in the I-CONECT dataset. The purpose of this paper
is to show that the facial features and interaction information
of the participants during the semi-structured interviews are
impacted by the cognitive conditions of participants.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows.
Section 2 reviews the related work of detecting MCI using
facial features. Section 3 describes the dataset and explains
the preprocessing procedure and feature extraction. Section
4 provides the experimental implementation and results.
Finally, Section 5 concludes this paper with a discussion and
future research directions.
2. Related Work
In this section, we will review past studies in the field
of computer vision to determine human cognitions mainly
based on facial features, including eye movements and facial
expressions.
Eye Features: Several studies have investigated the
differences in eye features between NC and MCI [19–
21]. These eye features include eye movements, gaze, and
blinking. Alzahrani et al. [22] computed an eye aspect ratio
from six points of participants’ facial landmarks extracted
using Dlib [23] and Openface [24] libraries, which have pretrained models for facial features extraction. They calculated the eye blinking rate for every participant and applied
basic machine learning algorithms to predict participants’
cognitive conditions. Because they used two different pretrained models, they reported a 10% accuracy difference
between the models. Chen et al. [20] have analyzed the
eye movement patterns of participants while performing
face recognition tasks. They found that older adults tend to
focus on the center of the target face especially the elderly
with low Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) scores.
Furthermore, Nam et al.[25] recorded participants’ faces
while they watch emotion-evoking videos to analyze the
correlation between the eye and head movements. Using
Openface [24], they extracted the eye and head movements.
They analyzed these data in order to observe the attention
and concentration decline of dementia patients. They concluded that AD patients tend to have eye movements in the
same vertical direction as their heads. Haque et al. [26]
developed a deep learning model which estimates participants’ eye gaze during memory-triggering tasks in a clinical
setting. They were able to distinguish cognitive impairment
participants by tracking their eye gaze and viewing time
during the tasks.
Facial Expression: Studies have shown that cognitive impairment does affect a person’s facial expression
[27, 28]. Using computer vision approaches, researchers
have extracted facial action units [29] or estimated facial
expression using deep learning methods [30] to predict
participants’ cognitive condition. Jiang et al. [31] recorded
participants’ faces while undergoing a memory test in a
clinical setting. They extracted participants’ facial expressions using a pre-trained Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) on a popular facial expression dataset that is not
dedicated to elderly faces. The estimated facial expression
for the video frames are average for subject-level facial
expression. Traditional machine learning algorithms were
implemented to classify cognitively impaired participants
from cognitively unimpaired ones. They also considered
the viewing time of the targeted region. Fei et al. [30]
extracted participants’ facial expressions when participants
are watching emotional stimuli. The authors computed the
emotional occurrence among cognitive conditions elderly.
They selected time periods of the participants’ emotional
occurrence which has a large difference between MCI
and NC. A traditional machine learning algorithm was
used to classify participants’ conditions. Gerlowska et al.
[32] showed no differences in the frequency of emotions
expressed in patients and healthy controls. An emotional
functioning pattern among older adults was noticed despite
cognitive dysfunctions. The analysis was based on mimicking 6 basic emotions that were shown on a screen for the
subjects and manually selecting 10-15 most intense seconds.
Tanaka et al. [29] extracted facial landmarks using Openface
[24] from participants while responding to an agent system.
They tracked facial landmarks that represent facial action
units during the participants’ response to the agent. They
developed an algorithm to extract talking segments using
a sequence of facial landmarks that surround the mouth.
Using this approach, they were able to classify participants
with dementia using traditional machine learning methods.
Holistic Facial Features: There are limited works that
use holistic facial features to detect participants’ cognitive conditions. Umeda-Kameyama et al. [33] implemented
deep learning models to detect cognitive impairment conditions of participants’ facial images. Consequently, spatial
facial features are extracted for the training and evaluation
of the model. They found that the model had better prediction performance when using the lower half of participants’
facial images. Lee et al. [34] applied two-stream ConvNet
using spatial and motion features to classify participants’
conditions with frame sequence intervals of 10 frames per
segment.
We focused on studies that adapted computer vision
algorithms in facial feature extraction either implementing
DL models that are trained on large datasets to capture these
features or proposing a model that is solely for the purpose
of detecting the participants’ cognitive status. Regardless
of the adapted methods, the participant’s facial features led
to the revealing of the cognitive conditions. In most of the
works, participants were in a clinical setting in which the
study staff had control over the room lighting and point view
of participants’ faces [30, 31]. However, video recording
of participants’ faces in a home setting is very challenging
to have an automated method to extract facial features.
We have faced some challenges in this respect. Additional
challenges will be also discussed later in this paper.
Alsuhaibani et al.
Page 2 of 10

Detection of MCI Using Facial Features in Video Conversations
Figure 1: The Prepossessing Steps of Participants’ Videos.
In addition to the reviewed above, facial landmarks
extracted using pre-trained models do not achieve highly
accurate results on the elderly, especially older adults with
cognitive impairment conditions [35, 36]. Therefore, the
detection of facial landmarks still needs to be improved for
the elderly. This motivated our approach where we extracted
holistic facial features using Convolutional Autoencoder
(CAE).
3. Materials and Methods
In this section, we introduce the I-CONECT dataset and
our approach to preprocessing the participants’ appearance
during the interviews. We also explain our method of spatial
and temporal extractions of features.
3.1. Dataset
The Internet-Based Conversational Engagement Clinical Trial (I-CONECT) has video-recorded semi-structured
interviews between the socially-isolated-older participants
and trained conversational staff [18]. The participants have
a minimum age limit of 75 and live in socially isolated
environments to be included in this study. These participants
were clinically diagnosed with either MCI or NC at the
baseline. For each session, the participants and interviewer
have a specific theme to discuss such as pets, foods, history,
etc. Each session is approximately 30 minutes in duration.
A total of 158 themes of video chats have been recorded
among 69 subjects who were assigned to the intervention
(i.e. video-chats) group.
We have selected four themes for this study based on
the number of participants with recordings. Table 1 shows
the overview of selected themes (Summertime, Self-Care,
Halloween, Cities and Towns) with the trial’s week number,
the total number of participants that attended, and the
number of selected videos based on the quality evaluation
which we discuss in Section 3.2. Demographic characteristics of participants vary between every theme since some
Table 1
Themes general information.
Themes
Trial’s Week
Total Participants
Selected Videos
Summertime
1
66
30
Self-Care
2
60
30
Halloween
23
59
32
Cities and Towns
9
59
39
Table 2
Demographic
information
of
participants
for
selected
themes.
Themes
Age, Years
(mean) (SD)
Education
(mean) (SD)
Condition
(MCI/NC)
Gender
(M/F)
Summertime
80.7 (4.75)
15.8 (2.79)
14/16
8/22
Self-Care
80.5 (4.24)
15.4 (2.63)
16/14
11/19
Halloween
80.3 (3.73)
15.3 (2.5)
14/18
12/20
Cities and Towns
80.7 (4.31)
15.5 (2.59)
19/20
15/24
participants have missed these themes’ sessions or their
videos are excluded in the current study due to quality issues
with the videos. Since the selected participants of the themes
are inconsistent, Table 2 shows the demographics by the
themes.
In our study, we made sure that videos with the same
topic were analyzed separately because topics would trigger
specific emotions that do affect facial features. The participants were assessed for their cognitive status (i.e., MCI vs.
NC) at three-time points (baseline, Month 6, Month 12). We
used the cognitive status assessed closest to the video chats.
In our experiment, we used the clinical status assessed at the
beginning of the trial except for the Halloween theme which
occurred near the six-month (24 weeks) evaluation.
3.2. Data preprocessing
The I-CONECT dataset requires preprocessing to make
it suitable for training on our model. The preprocessing
steps include: selecting the participants’ appearance during
the videos, face extraction, quality evaluation, and facial
feature extraction. The videos include the participants’ IDs
Alsuhaibani et al.
Page 3 of 10

Detection of MCI Using Facial Features in Video Conversations
during the facial appearance. Thus, optical character recognition (OCR) helped to determine the desired frames from
the video with less computation and higher confidence.
We used CRAFT [37] which is a pre-trained model that
performs scene text detection on natural images. Because
the videos have different frame rates, we fixed the frame
extraction rate of the videos. We performed a downsampling
of the original frame per second (fps) which ranged from 30
fps to 10 fps. In our experiment, we choose a frame rate of
10 fps by following the frameshift value from Equation 1 to
perform frame selection.
𝐹𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒𝑆ℎ𝑖𝑓𝑡= 𝑅𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑑𝑜𝑤𝑛
(𝑓𝑝𝑠𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙
𝑓𝑝𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡
)
(1)
In order to detect participants’ faces, we used the retina
face pre-trained model [38] to detect and extract the subject
faces. Figure 1 shows the preprocessing steps to extract
the facial features from the participant video interviews. To
ensure that all extracted faces belong to participants, the
detected faces are referenced by face size and coordination
within the frames. Faces within the created area of interest
are kept which results in better face extraction of the
participants.
We randomly evaluated the majority of the extracted
faces from every video. The quality evaluation criteria are
as follows: 1. Very good: all the faces are clear and the
lighting is good. 2. Good: all the faces are clear and the
lighting is acceptable. 3. Ok: most of the faces are clear
or need further processing to enhance the extracted faces.
4. Poor: some of the extracted faces are unclear, i.e. screen
obstacle covers part of the faces. 5. Very poor: most of the
extracted faces are not acceptable due to lighting conditions
or subjects’ faces being barely detectable. This step is
performed manually because it is challenging to automate
this step. The participants’ videos that do not meet the
quality standards are dropped. We set the passing limit for
video ratings of very good and good.
3.3. Unsupervised learning
Facial Features: Since there are no pre-trained CNN
models suitable for the elderly especially those with cognitive impairment [36], we initialized an autoencoder neural
network architecture which is integrated to solve the issue
of extracting meaningful features from unlabeled data. The
autoencoder depends on three components which are the
encoder and decoder, and latent code. We integrated a
CNN for the encoder and decoder of the autoencoder to
extract subjects’ facial features. We extracted the subject’s
facial features at the frame level. We applied a CAE neural
network with ResNet-50 architecture [39] in the encoder
and the reverse architecture of ResNet-50 as a decoder with
a latent feature size of 128. Table 3 shows the architecture
of ResNet-50 with the output size of network layers based
on our input size of the faces. Using this approach, we
generated a feature vector of every frame. The feature
vectors should have embedded features of facial expression,
head pose, eye gaze, and general facial features. extracted
Table 3
The ResNet-50 Architecture of 96 image size input.
layer name
output size
50-layer
conv1
48 × 48
7 × 7, 64, stride 2
conv2_x
24 × 24
3 × 3 max pool, stride 2
⎡
⎢
⎢⎣
1 × 1,
64
3 × 3,
64
1 × 1,
256
⎤
⎥
⎥⎦
× 3
conv3_x
12 × 12
⎡
⎢
⎢⎣
1 × 1,
128
3 × 3,
128
1 × 1,
512
⎤
⎥
⎥⎦
× 4
conv4_x
6 × 6
⎡
⎢
⎢⎣
1 × 1,
256
3 × 3,
256
1 × 1,
1024
⎤
⎥
⎥⎦
× 6
conv5_x
3 × 3
⎡
⎢
⎢⎣
1 × 1,
512
3 × 3,
512
1 × 1,
2048
⎤
⎥
⎥⎦
× 3
average pool, 128-d fc, softmax
faces are inconsistent in terms of width and height. Thus,
they are resized to a width and height of 96. The face size is
set to avoid upsampling of participants’ faces.
Feature analysis: It is challenging to interpret the latent
features of an autoencoder with the original image. For
example, the values of the vector elements that represent
facial expressions, poses, or eye gazes are still ambiguous.
In fact, it is an ongoing research topic, nevertheless, we
show that the reconstructed image preserved the facial
features of the original image. Figure 2 shows examples
of a participant’s face with different facial features that are
encoded and decoded using our CAE model after training.
Since we are dealing with videos, consecutive frames should
have similar features with only slight changes, based on
the participant’s facial movement, which could represent the
changes in facial expression and eye features as well.
The latent feature vectors have embedded participants’
facial features based on their interaction during the interviews. The CAE preserves the related facial attributes in
the latent feature vectors. In order to prove and ensure the
relativity of facial features within these vectors, we have
calculated the cosine similarity among various facial representations of the embedding features of the same subject.
Figure 3 shows the values of latent feature vector similarity
among the selected facial frames of the same participant
during the same theme discussion. We set a reference
facial embedding vector that has a neutral facial expression,
clear face presentation, and the participant’s head pose is
relatively ideal during the interview. This empirical result
shows the difference in the facial feature representation. It is
clear to observe that the vector that has the largest difference
is when the participant raised a paper that covered part of the
face which threw off the embedding features. Although the
cosine similarity ranges from -1 to 1 where 1 is the same
vector and -1 is the opposite vector, all these similarity have
values above 0 which indicate they are similar in the facial
features of the same participant.
Alsuhaibani et al.
Page 4 of 10

Detection of MCI Using Facial Features in Video Conversations
Figure 2: Examples of participant’s face and autoencoder
reconstructed Ones.
Figure 3: The vector cosine similarities between several
latent feature vectors.
3.4. Temporal information
Segments and sequences: We have extracted features
that fed to the model which represent segments and sequences of the participants’ interaction. We define a segment as consecutive frames within a video that have extracted faces. A segment within a video is ended when three
consecutive frames do not show a participant’s face as the
main face in the frame. We also refer to a sequence as a
set of consecutive frames. In the selection of the sequence
and segments of the videos, a sequence must present all its
interval facial features. Thus, the segment is dropped if its
number of frames is less than the sequence size. During the
feature arrangement, we made sure that consecutive frames
are set to the same sequence. The video has three main
parts which are the participant’s face, the interviewer’s face,
and the theme introduction slides. We are interested in the
participants’ faces; thus, we kept the participants’ frames
and labeled their appearance as it is shown in Figure 4. Consequently, we are also showing a snippet of the number of
segments and sequences of participants that have different
cognitive conditions. Figure 5 shows the plot of segments
and sequence indices within a video. Although this is a
small example of the sequence and segment information,
the figure leads to the idea that MCI participants have less
continuous taking time compared to the NC participants.
This indicates that interviewers tend to follow up more.
Temporal features: The transformers were introduced
by [40] for machine translation. Although transformers are
widely used in the Natural Language Processing field, the
computer vision field also benefited from the concept and
is being applied to images and videos [41, 42]. The idea of
representing a frame as a token should help the prediction
of subjects’ conditions. Since transformers have proven
their capability in various deep-learning interventions, they
can capture temporal information from sequential frame
features due to the attention mechanism represented in
Equation 2 where Q, K, and V are query, key, and value,
respectively. Transformers also use multi-head attention to
perform a parallel computation of the attention mechanism
where a key, query, and value are split into a number of
heads and concatenated after the self-attention is applied.
Equation 3 shows the computation process of attention
scores where self-attention is calculated for every head
where 𝑊𝑜is a learnable parameter that is multiplied by the
concatenation of all the heads. Heads equation is shown in
Equation 4.
𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛(𝑄, 𝐾, 𝑉) = 𝑠𝑜𝑓𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥
(
𝑄𝐾𝑇
√
𝑑𝑘
)
𝑉
(2)
𝑀𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖𝐻𝑒𝑎𝑑(𝑄, 𝐾, 𝑉) = 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑎𝑡(ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑1, ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑2, ...ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑖)𝑊𝑜
(3)
Where
ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑖= 𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛(𝑄𝑊𝑄
𝑖, 𝐾𝑊𝐾
𝑖, 𝑉𝑊𝑉
𝑖)
(4)
Transformers are able to capture the dependency of
the input data, so the representation of the feature vectors
and classification tokens affect the behavior of the model.
Thus, we created a classification token for every sequence
which is a common practice for sequence classification
using transformers [41, 43]. The classification token is fed
to a classifier to perform sequence classification of the input.
Thus, this arbitrary token would have learned from the selfattention mechanism and positional embedding layer the
label of the sequence input.
One of the important components of transformers is
the positional embedding layer. This layer preserves the
positions of the sequential representation for the attention
mechanism. This layer inspired us to have the sequence and
segment representation of every video added to the transformer. This positioning of the facial features could yield a
hierarchical representation of an overall representation of a
participant’s video.
Alsuhaibani et al.
Page 5 of 10

Detection of MCI Using Facial Features in Video Conversations
Figure 4: The frame extraction from a video with segments and sequences labeling.
Figure 5: An example of a number of segments and sequences of participants with different cognitive conditions.
4. Experiments and Results
In this section, we present our experiment implementation details. Then, we explain the section performance of our
model. Eventually, we study the model performance while
changing some of the hyperparameters of the model in the
ablation study.
4.1. Implementation
We implemented our models using Python 3.8.10 and
PyTorch 1.12.0.0+cu102 and ran the experiments on the
NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1080 GPU. The CAE model has
a latent size of 128 with input and reconstructed images
of size 96 × 96. The model was trained for 32 epochs
using the Adam optimizer and Mean Square Error (MSE)
loss function. The embedded facial features / latent feature
vectors are updated until the MSE reaches a small value
between the original face and the reconstructed one.
The transformer was implemented in the same environment and trained for 40 epochs with Adam optimizer and
weighted binary cross-entropy (BCE) loss function that is
shown in Equation 5. The model consists of four transformer
encoder layers, three positional embedding layers (sequential, sequence, and segment), and a classifier. The encoder
has a hidden dimension equal to the latent feature vector size
which is 128 and two heads. The classifier is a multilayer
perceptron (MLP) which has three fully connected layers
of [64, 32, 2]. The model is trained with a dropout of
the value of 0.2. Figure 6 shows the transformer diagram.
The first stage arranges the facial feature sequences with
the appendant of a classification token. The second stage
is adding the positional embeddings of the sequences and
the transformer encoder. The third stage contains the MLP
which takes the classification tokens output and makes a
binary classification decision after a sigmoid function maps
the model output.
𝑊𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑒𝑑𝐵𝐶𝐸= −𝛽(𝑦𝑖𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑝𝑖)+(1−𝑦𝑖)𝑙𝑜𝑔(1−𝑝𝑖)) (5)
where 𝛽is the weight assigned to the positive class.
In our sequence approach, we defined M ∈ℝ𝕝𝕩𝔽as
a sequence where 𝑙is the sequence size (15) and 𝐹
∈
ℝ𝟙𝟚𝟠is the latent feature vector. The segments are defined as 𝑆= {𝑀1, 𝑀2, ...𝑀𝑠}. The video is presented as
𝑉
= {𝑆1, 𝑆2, ...𝑆𝑣} or {𝑀1, 𝑀2, ...𝑀𝑛}. The positional
embeddings are calculated as follows 𝑃= 𝑃𝑀+ 𝑃𝑆+ 𝑃𝑝.
Eventually, the model input is 𝑍= 𝑧+ 𝑃where z refers to
the latent feature vectors. 𝑃∈ℝ𝟙𝟚𝟠is the overall positional
embeddings that capture the sequential representation of
feature vectors because self-attention in transformers does
not consider the timing appearance of the facial features.
Considering the same concept, the positional embeddings
within a video of the sequences and segments are captured
in this layer. The purpose of this implementation is to have
a hierarchical representation of every participant’s video as
we evaluate the model on the participants’ video level.
4.2. Results
We separated the training and evaluation of the model
based on the interview themes. Thus, all results will refer
to the target theme. Accuracy, F1 score, and Area under the
ROC Curve (AUC) are the evaluation metrics. The accuracy
reflects the percentage of participants that were correctly
classified during the testing. The F1 score is a combination
score of precision and recall. AUC measures the model’s
ability to distinguish between binary cognitive conditions.
Alsuhaibani et al.
Page 6 of 10

Detection of MCI Using Facial Features in Video Conversations
Figure 6: The model diagram of training the transformers.
Table 4
The model evaluation of 15 as a sequence size with positional embedding of sequence, segment, both, and none.
Themes
positional information
no position
sequence
segment
sequence and segment
Accuracy
F1
AUC
Accuracy
F1
AUC
Accuracy
F1
AUC
Accuracy
F1
AUC
Summertime
76.7%
0.77
0.77
76.6%
0.79
0.76
80%
0.81
0.8
83.3%
0.85
0.83
Self-care
70%
0.64
0.69
63.3%
0.56
0.63
60%
0.5
0.59
66.7%
0.58
0.66
Halloween
84.4%
0.86
0.84
75%
0.79
0.74
81.3%
0.84
0.8
87.5%
0.89
0.87
Cities and Towns
76.9%
0.77
0.77
76.9%
0.76
0.77
79.5%
0.79
0.8
79.5%
0.78
0.8
We randomly separated the participants into 10-folds and
performed cross-validation. We ensured the representation
of participants from both cognitive conditions are assigned
to the test fold during the random assigning. The procedure
is to classify a video based on the percentage of the correct
classified sequences within a video. We labeled a video as
correctly classified if the majority of sequences within a
video are correctly classified.
Table 4 shows the baseline performance of our model
which considers the embedded facial features and does not
consider the positions of the sequences and segments of
the videos. The segments and sequences positional embeddings have improved the detection performance of the
participants’ cognitive conditions. The combinations of both
of these positions performed better than either of them.
In fact, applying one of these positions could drop the
detection accuracy as it is presented for the Halloween
theme when we add only one of these positional information
the performance drops. The Self-care theme has the least
detection performance among the themes which is impacted
by the quality of the participants’ facial appearance during
the interview.
We can observe that by adding the segments and sequences information the transformer helped the model analyze the participants’ interaction behavior or the length
of their response to the interviewers’ questions regardless
Table 5
Performance comparison with other MCI detection on I-
CONECT dataset.
Methods
Modality
Accuracy
F1
AUC
Asgari et al. (2017) [44]
Linguistic
83.3%
–
0.8
Chen et al. (2020) [45]
Linguistic
79.2%
–
0.84
Tang et al. (2022) [46]
Acoustic & Linguistic
–
–
0.83
Ours
Visual
87.5%
0.89
0.87
of which theme is discussed. The results show that adding
the segment and sequence information does improve the
overall detection of the participants’ condition. Thus, MCI
is detectable using facial features; however, the interaction
boosted the model performance. Other studies have detected
MCI participants in the I-CONECT dataset using different
modalities. The main focus of the studies on the dataset
was on speech signals. Table 5 shows the best results of the
studies and compares them with our top performance result
among the themes in this study. Asgari et al. [44] extracted
Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) features from
participants’ transcribed data and classified the participants.
Chen et al. [45] have used a topic-based method to detect
participants with MCI. Tang et al. [46] integrated the acoustic and linguistic markers from the participants’ speeches to
distinguish the participants.
Alsuhaibani et al.
Page 7 of 10

Detection of MCI Using Facial Features in Video Conversations
Table 6
The evaluation of different sizes of sequences.
Themes
sequence size
15
20
25
Accuracy
F1
AUC
Accuracy
F1
AUC
Accuracy
F1
AUC
Summertime
83.3%
0.85
0.83
80%
0.82
0.79
77%
0.8
0.76
Self-care
66.7%
0.58
0.66
70%
0.66
0.7
60%
0.54
0.59
Halloween
87.5%
0.89
0.87
81.2%
0.83
0.81
81.2%
0.84
0.8
Cities and Towns
79.5%
0.78
0.8
79.5%
0.78
0.8
79.5%
0.76
0.8
4.3. Ablation study
In this section, we evaluated the model’s detecting
performance with variations of the model hyperparameters.
We show the effects of different sequence sizes, overlapping
of sequences, and loss function.
Sequence size: we studied the effect of changing the
sequence sizes when we feed the transformer with participants’ facial features. Table 6 shows the performance of the
model while applying different sequence sizes [15, 20, 25].
It is important to mention that changing the sequence size
would change the total number of sequences per participant
and the number of segments. In fact, the facial temporal
features extracted from the transformer will be affected
depending on the sequence size as well. The sequence size
of 15 has performed overall better than the size of 20 and
25. The Cities and Towns theme performance was sustained
across all sequence sizes. The prediction on the Self-care
theme had a slight improvement when the sequence size is
20 but it dropped when the sequence size is 25.
Sequence overlapping: we studied the effect of sequence overlapping while keeping the sequence size fixed.
Table 7 shows the accuracies of 0%, 20%, and 40% overlapping sizes while selecting sequences of facial features
during the training and evaluation. This study shows our sequence covered the majority of participants’ features during
the interviews. The overlapping of sequences will increase
the number of sequences and keep the number of segments
fixed. Thus, the accuracies decreased with the overlapping
except for the Cities and Towns themes. With the consideration of Cities and Towns theme performance shown in Table
4, the accuracy of adding segment information was similar
to adding sequence and segment information. However, the
increase of sequence information caused the model a better
prediction of the participants’ cognitive conditions. In other
words, sequence augmentation improved the prediction for
the Cities and Towns theme.
Loss function: although participants’ conditions are
balanced for all selected themes, the number of sequences
that represent each participant varies so the weighted binary
cross-entropy loss function triggers the class imbalance in
the training for every fold. Here, we study the concept
of applying the weighted BCE loss function to help the
model performance compared with the average BCE loss
function 6. Table 8 shows the accuracies of different themes
with consideration of changing the loss function. Across all
themes, the accuracies improved by at least 2.6% with the
Table 7
Detection comparison between sequence overlapping.
sequence overlapping percentage
Themes
0%
20%
40%
Summertime
83.3%
80%
80%
Self-care
66.7%
63.3%
60%
Halloween
87.5%
84.4%
75%
Cities and Towns
79.5%
79.5%
82.1%
Table 8
Comparison between applying weighted BCE and BCE as a
model loss function.
Themes
weighted BCE
BCE
Summertime
83.3%
76.7%
Self-care
66.7%
56.7%
Halloween
87.5%
78.1%
Cities and Towns
79.5%
76.9%
weighted BCE loss function. We investigate this to prove
that the model prediction performance improved with the
weighted BCE loss function. This loss function would act
as if the class with fewer samples has more samples based
on the ratio weight that is updated for every fold during the
training.
𝐵𝐶𝐸= −1
𝑁
𝑁
∑
𝑖=1
(𝑦𝑖𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑝𝑖) + (1 −𝑦𝑖)𝑙𝑜𝑔(1 −𝑝𝑖)) (6)
Our work has several limitations, especially regarding
the video quality. In our approach, the manual quality check
is one of the challenges which takes a considerably long
time to evaluate. However, an automated computer-based
approach will help achieve the evaluation faster; therefore,
more themes can be included in the study. The number of
eliminated videos within a theme is concernedly large which
is mainly based on the video quality. The video quality
does not only refer to the typical technical challenges of
the videos such as room lighting, viewpoint, and facial
appearance but it also considers the full face during the
interview because some participants did not show their
faces for the majority of the video. Therefore, older adults
are having challenges in handling computer intermedium
interviews.
Alsuhaibani et al.
Page 8 of 10

Detection of MCI Using Facial Features in Video Conversations
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we demonstrated a method to detect
older adults with MCI using their facial features in visual
semi-structured interviews from the I-CONECT study. The
method is based on extracting spatial features and temporal
information that is conducted by using a CAE and the
self-attention mechanism in the transformers. We showed
the interaction timing of the facial features of subjects
is important as it helped boost the performance of our
model in distinguishing the cognitive condition among participants. We conclude that using segments and sequence
indices within a video does improve the prediction of the
participants’ conditions. Participants’ facial features vary
during the topic discussion. Thus, future work will study
the sequences’ contribution to cognitive condition detection
among the participants including the speech data and the
automated video quality assessment using DL algorithms.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Muath Alsuhaibani: Conceptualization, Data curation,
Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Software, Validation, Visualization, Writing - original draft. Hiroko H.
Dodge: Investigation, Resources, Validation, Writing - review & editing. Mohammad H. Mahoor: Investigation,
Resources, Supervision, Project administration, Validation,
Writing - review & editing.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing
financial interests or personal relationships that could have
appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
The following federal fund supported this project:
R01AG051628, R01AG056102, RF1AG672448 from the
National Institute of Health (NIH) in the United States to
Dr. Hiroko Dodge. Dr. Mohammad Mahoor received a grant
from the Colorado Office of Economic Development and
International Trade in support of this research project.
References
[1] 2022 alzheimer’s disease facts and figures, Alzheimer’s & Dementia:
The Journal of the Alzheimer’s Association 18 (4) (2022) 700–789.
doi:10.1002/alz.12638.
[2] L. G. Apostolova, J. L. Cummings, Neuropsychiatric manifestations
in mild cognitive impairment: a systematic review of the literature,
Dementia and geriatric cognitive disorders 25 (2) (2008) 115–126.
[3] K. Herholz, S. Carter, M. Jones, Positron emission tomography imaging in dementia, The British journal of radiology 80 (special_issue_2)
(2007) S160–S167.
[4] G. D. Rabinovici, C. Gatsonis, C. Apgar, K. Chaudhary, I. Gareen,
L. Hanna, J. Hendrix, B. E. Hillner, C. Olson, O. H. Lesman-
Segev, et al., Association of amyloid positron emission tomography
with subsequent change in clinical management among medicare
beneficiaries with mild cognitive impairment or dementia, Jama
321 (13) (2019) 1286–1294.
[5] S.-K. Herukka, A. H. Simonsen, N. Andreasen, I. Baldeiras,
M.
Bjerke,
K.
Blennow,
S.
Engelborghs,
G.
B.
Frisoni,
T.
Gabryelewicz,
S.
Galluzzi,
et
al.,
Recommendations
for
cerebrospinal fluid alzheimer’s disease biomarkers in the diagnostic
evaluation of mild cognitive impairment, Alzheimer’s & Dementia
13 (3) (2017) 285–295.
[6] D. A. Butterfield, T. Reed, S. F. Newman, R. Sultana, Roles of amyloid 𝛽-peptide-associated oxidative stress and brain protein modifications in the pathogenesis of alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive
impairment, Free Radical Biology and Medicine 43 (5) (2007) 658–
677.
[7] C. Ritchie, N. Smailagic, A. H. Noel-Storr, Y. Takwoingi, L. Flicker,
S. E. Mason, R. McShane, Plasma and cerebrospinal fluid amyloid
beta for the diagnosis of alzheimer’s disease dementia and other
dementias in people with mild cognitive impairment (mci), Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews (6) (2014).
[8] T. Jo, K. Nho, S. L. Risacher, A. J. Saykin, Deep learning detection of
informative features in tau pet for alzheimer’s disease classification,
BMC bioinformatics 21 (21) (2020) 1–13.
[9] T.-E. Kam, H. Zhang, Z. Jiao, D. Shen, Deep learning of static and
dynamic brain functional networks for early mci detection, IEEE
transactions on medical imaging 39 (2) (2019) 478–487.
[10] S. Yang, J. M. S. Bornot, K. Wong-Lin, G. Prasad, M/eeg-based biomarkers to predict the mci and alzheimer’s disease: a review from
the ml perspective, IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering
66 (10) (2019) 2924–2935.
[11] Z. Hu, J. Tang, Z. Wang, K. Zhang, L. Zhang, Q. Sun, Deep learning
for image-based cancer detection and diagnosis- a survey, Pattern
Recognition 83 (2018) 134–149.
[12] L. Shen, L. R. Margolies, J. H. Rothstein, E. Fluder, R. McBride,
W. Sieh, Deep learning to improve breast cancer detection on screening mammography, Scientific reports 9 (1) (2019) 12495.
[13] D. Painuli, S. Bhardwaj, et al., Recent advancement in cancer
diagnosis using machine learning and deep learning techniques: A
comprehensive review, Computers in Biology and Medicine 146
(2022) 105580.
[14] Z. Jiang, S. Harati, A. Crowell, H. S. Mayberg, S. Nemati, G. D.
Clifford, Classifying major depressive disorder and response to deep
brain stimulation over time by analyzing facial expressions, IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 68 (2) (2020) 664–672.
[15] M. Fang, S. Peng, Y. Liang, C.-C. Hung, S. Liu, A multimodal fusion
model with multi-level attention mechanism for depression detection,
Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 82 (2023) 104561.
[16] A. Bandini, S. Orlandi, H. J. Escalante, F. Giovannelli, M. Cincotta,
C. A. Reyes-Garcia, P. Vanni, G. Zaccara, C. Manfredi, Analysis
of facial expressions in parkinson’s disease through video-based
automatic methods, Journal of neuroscience methods 281 (2017) 7–
20.
[17] M. L. Birnbaum, A. Abrami, S. Heisig, A. Ali, E. Arenare, C. Agurto,
N. Lu, J. M. Kane, G. Cecchi, Acoustic and facial features from
clinical interviews for machine learning–based psychiatric diagnosis:
Algorithm development, JMIR Mental Health 9 (1) (2022) e24699.
[18] K. Yu, K. Wild, K. Potempa, B. M. Hampstead, P. A. Lichtenberg,
L. M. Struble, P. Pruitt, E. L. Alfaro, J. Lindsley, M. MacDonald,
et al., The internet-based conversational engagement clinical trial
(i-conect) in socially isolated adults 75+ years old: randomized
controlled trial protocol and covid-19 related study modifications,
Frontiers in digital health 3 (2021) 714813.
[19] T. J. Crawford, S. Higham, T. Renvoize, J. Patel, M. Dale, A. Suriya,
S. Tetley, Inhibitory control of saccadic eye movements and cognitive
impairment in alzheimer’s disease, Biological psychiatry 57 (9)
(2005) 1052–1060.
[20] C. Y. Chan, A. B. Chan, T. M. Lee, J. H. Hsiao, Eye-movement
patterns in face recognition are associated with cognitive decline in
older adults, Psychonomic bulletin & review 25 (2018) 2200–2207.
[21] T. D. Wilcockson, D. Mardanbegi, B. Xia, S. Taylor, P. Sawyer,
H. W. Gellersen, I. Leroi, R. Killick, T. J. Crawford, Abnormalities of
saccadic eye movements in dementia due to alzheimer’s disease and
Alsuhaibani et al.
Page 9 of 10

Detection of MCI Using Facial Features in Video Conversations
mild cognitive impairment, Aging (Albany NY) 11 (15) (2019) 5389.
[22] F. Alzahrani, B. Mirheidari, D. Blackburn, S. Maddock, H. Christensen, Eye blink rate based detection of cognitive impairment using
in-the-wild data, in: 2021 9th International Conference on Affective
Computing and Intelligent Interaction (ACII), IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–8.
[23] G. B. Huang, M. Mattar, T. Berg, E. Learned-Miller, Labeled faces
in the wild: A database forstudying face recognition in unconstrained
environments, in: Workshop on faces in’Real-Life’Images: detection,
alignment, and recognition, 2008.
[24] T. Baltrusaitis, A. Zadeh, Y. C. Lim, L.-P. Morency, Openface 2.0:
Facial behavior analysis toolkit, in: 2018 13th IEEE international
conference on automatic face & gesture recognition (FG 2018),
IEEE, 2018, pp. 59–66.
[25] U. Nam, K. Lee, H. Ko, J.-Y. Lee, E. C. Lee, Analyzing facial and eye
movements to screen for alzheimer’s disease, Sensors 20 (18) (2020)
5349.
[26] R. U. Haque, A. L. Pongos, C. M. Manzanares, J. J. Lah, A. I.
Levey, G. D. Clifford, Deep convolutional neural networks and
transfer learning for measuring cognitive impairment using eyetracking in a distributed tablet-based environment, IEEE Transactions
on Biomedical Engineering 68 (1) (2020) 11–18.
[27] T. McLellan, L. Johnston, J. Dalrymple-Alford, R. Porter, The
recognition of facial expressions of emotion in alzheimer’s disease: a
review of findings, Acta Neuropsychiatrica 20 (5) (2008) 236–250.
[28] I. Spoletini, C. Marra, F. Di Iulio, W. Gianni, G. Sancesario, F. Giubilei, A. Trequattrini, P. Bria, C. Caltagirone, G. Spalletta, Facial
emotion recognition deficit in amnestic mild cognitive impairment
and alzheimer disease, The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry
16 (5) (2008) 389–398.
[29] H. Tanaka, H. Adachi, H. Kazui, M. Ikeda, T. Kudo, S. Nakamura,
Detecting dementia from face in human-agent interaction, in: Adjunct
of the 2019 International Conference on Multimodal Interaction,
2019, pp. 1–6.
[30] Z. Fei, E. Yang, L. Yu, X. Li, H. Zhou, W. Zhou, A novel deep neural network-based emotion analysis system for automatic detection
of mild cognitive impairment in the elderly, Neurocomputing 468
(2022) 306–316.
[31] Z. Jiang, S. Seyedi, R. U. Haque, A. L. Pongos, K. L. Vickers,
C. M. Manzanares, J. J. Lah, A. I. Levey, G. D. Clifford, Automated
analysis of facial emotions in subjects with cognitive impairment,
Plos one 17 (1) (2022) e0262527.
[32] J. Gerłowska, K. Dmitruk, K. Rejdak, Facial emotion mimicry
in older adults with and without cognitive impairments due to
alzheimer’s disease, AIMS neuroscience 8 (2) (2021) 226.
[33] Y. Umeda-Kameyama, M. Kameyama, T. Tanaka, B.-K. Son, T. Kojima, M. Fukasawa, T. Iizuka, S. Ogawa, K. Iijima, M. Akishita,
Screening of alzheimer’s disease by facial complexion using artificial
intelligence, Aging (Albany NY) 13 (2) (2021) 1765.
[34] C.-C. Lee, H.-H. H. Chau, H.-L. Wang, Y.-F. Chuang, Y. Chau,
Detection of mild cognitive impairment by facial videos, in: 2022
IEEE International Conference on Consumer Electronics-Taiwan,
IEEE, 2022, pp. 197–198.
[35] A. Asgarian, S. Zhao, A. B. Ashraf, M. E. Browne, K. M. Prkachin,
A. Mihailidis, T. Hadjistavropoulos, B. Taati, Limitations and biases
in facial landmark detection d an empirical study on older adults with
dementia., in: CVPR Workshops, 2019, pp. 28–36.
[36] B. Taati, S. Zhao, A. B. Ashraf, A. Asgarian, M. E. Browne,
K. M. Prkachin, A. Mihailidis, T. Hadjistavropoulos, Algorithmic
bias in clinical populations—evaluating and improving facial analysis
technology in older adults with dementia, IEEE access 7 (2019)
25527–25534.
[37] Y. Baek, B. Lee, D. Han, S. Yun, H. Lee, Character region awareness
for text detection, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, 2019, pp. 9365–9374.
[38] J. Deng, J. Guo, E. Ververas, I. Kotsia, S. Zafeiriou, Retinaface:
Single-shot multi-level face localisation in the wild, in: Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2020, pp. 5203–5212.
[39] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Deep residual learning for image
recognition, in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, 2016, pp. 770–778.
[40] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N.
Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, I. Polosukhin, Attention is all you need, Advances
in neural information processing systems 30 (2017).
[41] A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai,
T. Unterthiner, M. Dehghani, M. Minderer, G. Heigold, S. Gelly,
et al., An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image
recognition at scale, arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929 (2020).
[42] A. Arnab, M. Dehghani, G. Heigold, C. Sun, M. Luˇci´c, C. Schmid,
Vivit: A video vision transformer, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
international conference on computer vision, 2021, pp. 6836–6846.
[43] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, K. Toutanova, Bert: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1810.04805 (2018).
[44] M. Asgari, J. Kaye, H. Dodge, Predicting mild cognitive impairment from spontaneous spoken utterances, Alzheimer’s & Dementia:
Translational Research & Clinical Interventions 3 (2) (2017) 219–
228.
[45] L. Chen, H. H. Dodge, M. Asgari, Topic-based measures of conversation for detecting mild cognitive impairment, in: Proceedings of
the conference. Association for Computational Linguistics. Meeting,
Vol. 2020, NIH Public Access, 2020, p. 63.
[46] F. Tang, J. Chen, H. H. Dodge, J. Zhou, The joint effects of acoustic
and linguistic markers for early identification of mild cognitive
impairment, Frontiers in digital health 3 (2022) 702772.
Alsuhaibani et al.
Page 10 of 10
